CRAFTS ILLUSIONS
You use the numenera to create holographic images that appear real. You are, in effect, an artist—a crafter of light and sound.  olographic images can never inflict direct harm or exert real force, but they can fool creatures, changing opinions and even behaviors if you craft them cleverly. You likely dress with flair and color. The appearance of things is important to you, both their beauty and their ugliness. You are a visual performer who can entertain, terrify, or fool  everyone you encounter. A Nano is the most likely character to be an illusionist, but Jacks find illusions to be helpful as well. The rare Glaive illusionist can find ways to use tricks in battle. 
connection:
-  Pick one other PC. This character is never fooled by your illusions and is never affected by the trickery of your special abilities. You can choose whether or not you know this fact.
2. Pick one other PC. They have a special angle on your illusions and can sometimes point out potential places of weakness.
3. Pick two other PCs who are willing to be trained as your assistants. When you use your Minor Illusion ability, if both of these characters are in immediate range, they can assist you, working together to ease your action.
4. Pick one other PC. That character’s face is so intriguing to you in a way you don’t understand that your minor illusions sometimes look like them, even when you don’t intend them to.
Additional Equipment: You have an oddity that appears to be a piece of clear glass in a synth frame. By manipulating hidden switches on the frame, you can make random moving images appear on the glass. The images are usually strange and sometimes incomprehensible.
Psychedelic Abilities: Your special abilities take on flamboyant visual and auditory qualities of your choosing. This alteration changes nothing other than the appearance of the effects. For example, your attack esoteries might look like monsters made of energy that assail your foes. Your Stasis esotery might look like a tentacled beast that holds the victim in place. Your Teleportation esotery might seem like a hole in space opens up and swallows you. Your Skill With Defense fighting move might look like ghostly echoes mimicking your actions or ephemeral arms blocking attacks against you. 
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your illusion has a special quality to it—perhaps an observer sees an image of something from their past. 
Major Effect Suggestions: The illusion lasts for one hour, or if it already lasts that long, it lasts for 28 hours.
Tier 1: Minor Illusion (1 Intellect point). You create a single image of a creature or object within immediate range. The image must fit within a 10-foot (3 m) cube. The image can move (for example, you could make the illusion of a person walk or attack), but it can’t leave the area defined by the cube. The illusion includes sound but not smell. It lasts for ten minutes, but if you want to change the original illusion significantly—such as making a creature appear to be wounded—you must concentrate on it again (though doing so doesn’t cost additional Intellect points). If you move beyond immediate range of the cube, the illusion vanishes. Action to create; action to modify.


EMPLOYS MAGNETISM
Electromagnetism is a fundamental force in the universe, and it is yours to command. You are a master of metal. You probably wear a lot of metal, perhaps as part of your clothing or armor, as part of your accessories (such as jewelry or piercings), embedded into your body surgically, or in some combination of these options. No one type of character is more likely than any other to employ magnetism, although Glaives who wield weapons and wear armor will find it an interesting complement to their powers.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. Whenever you use your powers, the metallic items on that character’s body shudder, rattle, clink, and shake if they are within short range.
2. Pick one other PC. You worked together in the past, and the job ended badly. 
3. Pick two other PCs. While practicing your Diamagnetism ability, you once accidentally sent them careening into each other. You’ve never been able to repeat it. Whether you tell them that you’ve been trying to replicate the strange effect is up to you.
4. Pick one other PC who has metallic elements in their body. You’re afraid to use your magnetism abilities near them because you once had a bad experience involving Move Metal and a (probably former) friend’s mechanical eyes.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The duration of the effect is doubled.
Major Effect Suggestions: An important item on the target’s person is destroyed.
Tier 1: Move Metal (1 Intellect point). You can exert force on metal objects within short range for one round. Once activated, your power has an effective Might Pool of 10, a Might Edge of 1, and an Effort of 2 (approximately equal to the strength of a fit, capable, adult human), and you can use it to move metal objects, push against metal objects, and so on. For example, in your round, you could lift and pull a light metal object anywhere within range to yourself or move a heavy object (like a piece of furniture) about 10 feet (3 m). This power lacks the fine control to wield a weapon or move objects with much speed, so in most situations, it’s not a means of attack. You can’t use this ability on your own body. The power lasts for one hour or until its Might Pool is depleted, whichever comes first. Action.


ENTERTAINS
You are an entertainer: a singer, dancer, poet, storyteller, or something similar. You perform for the benefit of others. Naturally charismatic and talented, you have also studied to master your art. You know all the old poems, songs, jokes, and stories, and you’re skilled at creating new ones, too. You probably wear flamboyant or at least fashionable clothes and use cosmetics, tattoos, or hair stylings for dramatic effect. The role of the entertainer fits the Jack best, though Glaives and Nanos sometimes entertain as well. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character is your worst critic. Your abilities to help or inspire others don’t function for them. 
2. Pick one other PC. They seem to really enjoy your attempts to entertain, and this brings out the performer in you. It’s up to that character whether their appreciation is real or they’re just being polite.
3. Pick one other PC. They are so inspired and put at ease by your stories or other forms of entertainment that when you use Levity, they gain +2 to their recovery rolls (instead of +1).
4. Pick one other PC. This person knows the secret to one of your favorite forms of entertainment. You worry constantly that they will steal it or reveal it. 
Additional Equipment: You start with a musical instrument or other tools needed to perform.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You enchant the target, who remains enchanted as long as you focus all your attention on keeping them that way.
Major Effect Suggestions: The target is forever favorably disposed toward you.
Tier 1: Levity. Through wit, charm, humor, and grace, you are trained in all social interactions other than those involving coercion or intimidation. During rests, you put friends and comrades at ease so much that they gain +1 to their recovery rolls. Enabler.


EXISTS PARTIALLY
OUT OF PHASE
You have the ability to change your phase state. In fact, you’re always slightly out of phase, giving you a ghostly translucence. With concentration, you can pass your hand through a solid object, allow a solid object to pass harmlessly through you, or literally walk through walls. However, moving in and out of different phase states requires extreme force of will and can be mentally taxing. The explanation for your strange power lies within some aspect of the numenera. Perhaps the ability emerged through the use of (or exposure to) lingering transdimensional technology or as the result of an encounter with a creature not native to this world or dimension. Perhaps one of your ancestors first developed the power and passed it down through generations. You might do whatever you can to play up your translucent appearance by wearing diaphanous, billowy clothing, or, depending on your personality, you might do just the opposite. Jacks enjoy the infiltration possibilities of changing their phase state, and Nanos appreciate the defensive capabilities. Glaives can use the offensive and defensive aspects but might find them a bit hindering as well. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You have known that character for a while, and they helped you gain control of your phase states.
2. Pick one other PC. Sometime in this character’s past, they had a devastating experience with going out of phase. Whether they choose to tell you about it is up to them.
3. Pick one other PC. You once accidentally moved your hand right through them. It was an unnerving experience for you both.
4. Pick two other PCs. They both really want to go out of phase and have been pestering you about it. But you’re not convinced they even know what that phrase means.
Minor Effect Suggestions: While out of phase, you also have an asset to your Speed defense tasks.
Major Effect Suggestions: While out of phase, you are also invisible.
Tier 1: Walk Through Walls (2 Intellect points). You can slowly pass through physical barriers at a rate of 1 inch (2.5 cm) per round (minimum of one round to pass through any barrier). You can’t act (other than moving) or perceive anything until you pass entirely through the barrier. You can’t pass through energy barriers. Action.


EXPLORES DARK PLACES
You explore the foreboding ruins and mysterious locales of the ancient eras, trained in such activities by those who have gone before you. You’re the archetypical treasure hunter, scavenger, and finder of lost things. You spend so much of your time in the dark that you slowly adapt to it, almost becoming a creature of the gloom yourself. Even in civilized areas, you prefer to keep to the shadows. Most likely, you wear dark clothing to help you blend into the blackness. On the other hand, you might wear sensible garments and gear because you have serious and dangerous business to attend to in the dark. Jacks are suited to exploring dark places; those who do so are called shadowjacks. Glaives who follow this path are known as shadow warriors, and Nanos are called shadowcasters.  
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character was your companion on previous expeditions, and the two of you work so well together that you both gain an asset to any die rolls to collaborate on the same task, fight the same foe, and so on.
2. Pick two other PCs. You think you once saw them through a keyhole doing something illegal. You can choose whether or not to share that information. The characters can choose whether it was really them (it could have been neither, one, or both), and they may or may not share that information in return.
3. Pick one other PC. This person always seems to hear you, no matter how stealthy you try to be.
4. Pick one other PC. This character is so loud in everything they do that you feel obligated to try to help them learn to move more quietly through the world. Whether or not they’re interested is up to them.
Additional Equipment: You start with an explorer’s pack. If you already have one, you can instead take 50 extra feet (15 m) of rope, rations for two more days, and two minor glowglobes.
Darkness Powers: Your special abilities (such as Nano esoteries) make almost no sound, and whatever visual displays they produce are dark and shadowy. These alterations change nothing other than the appearance of the effects. A Flash esotery is a silent burst of shadows, a Barrier esotery is a mass of shadowy wisps, and so on.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The target is also dazed for one round, during which time all of its tasks are hindered.
Major Effect Suggestions: The target is also stunned and loses its next turn. 
Tier 1: Superb Explorer. You are trained in searching, listening, climbing, balancing, and jumping tasks. Enabler.


FIGHTS WITH PANACHE
You know that style is at least as important as substance. Defeating foes is secondary to looking good while doing it. Some might call you a swashbuckler or daredevil. You leap through the air, make a flourish with your weapon, and attack, usually with a clever, biting show of wit. Your enemies hate you, but your allies adore you. Just watching you fight is entertaining. You very likely wear no armor, instead preferring stylish clothing—perhaps even a hat with a feather. Jacks and Glaives make the best swashbucklers, and they are the most common types of characters to fight with panache.  
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You’re always trying to impress this character with your skill, wit, appearance, or bravado. Perhaps they are a rival, perhaps you need their respect, or perhaps you’re romantically interested in them.
2. Pick one other PC. This character seems to anticipate your next move almost before you even begin it. When they collaborate with you on the same task or fight the same foe, you gain an asset on the task.
3. Pick one other PC. You fear that the character is jealous of your abilities and worry that it might lead to problems. 
4. Pick one other PC. This character is so enamored of your swashbuckling, entertaining ways during combat that they sometimes forget to take their own action.
Additional Equipment: You begin with a set of extremely stylish clothes and a jeweled weapon.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The target is so dazzled by your style that it is dazed for one round, during which time all of its tasks are hindered.
Major Effect Suggestions: Make an additional attack with your weapon on your turn.
Tier 1: Attack Flourish. With your attack, you add stylish moves, entertaining quips, or a certain “something” that entertains or impresses others. One creature you choose within short range who can see you gains an asset to its next task if taken within a round or two. Enabler.


FOCUSES MIND
OVER MATTER
Telekinesis. Psychokinesis. Mind over matter. The power has many names, but in the end, it all boils down to one thing—the molecules that make up all matter are yours to command. You likely call yourself a telekinetic or just a TK. Many telekinetics prefer to wear tight clothing without much accoutrement, so there is little that another TK could grab hold of psychically. On the other hand, you have the power to create very minor telekinetic effects at will, so your hair might always be in motion, you could have a few tiny objects floating around you, or you might wear a long cape that’s always billowing. Jacks are the most likely characters to be telekinetics, but Glaives find that the abilities add to their combat prowess, and Nanos, of course, appreciate the additional power. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character can cause your telekinetic powers to act oddly. Every once in a while, if the character stands directly next to you, your powers are canceled, but at other times, they seem improved when used near the PC.
2. Pick one other PC. This person thinks that your powers are completely hypothetical. 
3. Pick one other PC. You once joked that you could read their mind. Whether they found that exciting or utterly terrifying is up to them.
4. Pick one other PC. You feel strangely protective of that character and plan to do your best to keep them from harm. 
Mental Powers: Your special abilities that would normally use force or other energy instead use psychokinetic force. For example, a Flash or an Onslaught force blast is a psychokinetic blast from your mind. This alteration changes nothing except that you don’t need a free hand to perform those abilities. In addition, you can choose to learn Impetus instead of one of the abilities granted by your type. Enabler.
Impetus (2 Intellect points): A loose object within short range that you could carry in one hand is drawn to your free hand. If the object is stuck or held by another creature, you must succeed on a Might roll to rip it free, or the object remains where it was. Action.
Minor Effect Suggestions: An object moves faster or more efficiently.
Major Effect Suggestions: You can move or affect twice as much as normal.
Tier 1: Deflect Attacks (1 Intellect point). Using your mind, you protect yourself from incoming attacks. For the next ten minutes, you are trained in Speed defense tasks. Action to initiate.


FUSES FLESH AND STEEL
At some point in your past, some of your organic parts were replaced with artificial components. (Alternatively, you belong to a secret species of biomechanical hybrids.) These artificial components might be subdermal, or they might resemble more overt metal or synth plating on your skin. They can also take the form of threadlike tendrils of circuitry winding across your flesh. Whatever their appearance, these components give you special abilities. As you advance, you can add to, modify, or discover new functions for them. Unfortunately, your artificial body also has special requirements when it takes damage. You might wear a cloak with a hood or something similar to hide your artificial parts from those who would persecute you. Because your components are tricky to repair, as time goes on, it might become more difficult to conceal your true nature, with exposed circuitry, metal plates, and more in a state of partial disassembly. Anyone might be a cybernetic organism. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character knows your true nature, even if no one else does. If your components are not particularly hidden, they know a different secret of yours, such as a preprogrammed word that will shut you down for ten minutes.
2. Pick one other PC. Being close to this person sometimes makes your mechanical parts vibrate slightly. You can decide whether this sensation is unnerving or pleasant.
3. Pick one other PC. You’re pretty sure that this character is just here to mine you for parts. They choose whether or not this is true. 
4. Pick one other PC who also has mechanical parts. The two of you have bonded over conversations about this element you share, and you feel a special connection. Additional Equipment: You have a bag of light tools and a variety of parts to repair yourself.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your servos learn from your successful actions. You gain an asset to similar actions involving the same task (such as making attacks against the same foe or operating the same device).
Major Effect Suggestions: You discharge a small pulse of power into your foe. Make an immediate attack against that foe (using the same stat as the action that caused the major effect). If the attack succeeds, it deals 4 points of electrical damage.
Tier 1: Enhanced Body. You gain +1 to Armor, +3 to your Might Pool, and +3 to your Speed Pool. Enabler.
Special Healing. Traditional healing skills, medicines, and techniques work only half as well for you. Each time you start at full health, the first 5 points of damage you take can never be healed in these ways or recovered normally. Instead, you must use repairing skills and abilities to restore those points. For example, if you start with a full Might Pool of 10 and take 8 points of damage, you can use recovery rolls to restore 3 points, but the remaining 5 points must be restored with repair tasks.


HOWLS AT THE MOON
Sometimes the numenera is a double-edged sword. You are cursed and blessed to be able to transform into a powerful creature, drawing additional mass from a transdimensional source. You and the GM should work out the exact nature of the creature, including its appearance, but it’s a wild beast of rage and blood—at least until you learn to control it. Creatures like you are often called “lycanthropes.” Style and appearance are probably low on your list of concerns. Your clothes might be ragged because your transformation is hard on them (or they’re cheap because you know they’ll be destroyed the next time you transform). Anyone can be a lycanthrope. A Glaive likely benefits the most from the transformation.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. That character is able to soothe you when you’re in beast form. You’ll never attack them while transformed, and if they spend three consecutive turns using their action to calm you down, you can revert to your normal form without having to make a roll.
2. Pick one other PC. You believe that this character intends to convince you to join an entertainment venue (or capture you for the same). They choose whether or not this is true.
3. Pick two other PCs. They know that it’s beneficial for you to kill and eat a creature while you’re in beast form, and they often work together to make sure that happens.
4. Pick one other PC. Since this character saw you in beast form, they have been terrified of you. You are determined to show them that you’re not as dangerous as they believe.
Additional Equipment: You have an accurate chronometer artifact that always lets you know when the next transformation is coming.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The target is so intimidated by your bestial attack that it is dazed for one round, hindering its tasks.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your attack conveys a small bit of your lycanthropy. If your foe survives, one month later, the target transforms into an uncontrolled beast. The GM decides what happens from there.
Tier 1: Beast Form. On five consecutive nights each month, you change into a monstrous beast for up to one hour each night. In this new form, you gain +8 to your Might Pool, +1 to your Might Edge, +2 to your Speed Pool, and +1 to your Speed Edge. While in beast form, you can’t spend Intellect points for any reason other than to try to change to your normal form before the one-hour duration is over (a difficulty 2 task). In addition, you attack any and every living creature within short range. After you revert to your normal form, you take a –1 penalty to all rolls for one hour. If you did not kill and eat at least one substantial creature while in beast form, the penalty increases to –2 and affects all your rolls for the next 28 hours. Action to change back.


HUNTS
You are a tracker. Perhaps you hunt animals or more deadly creatures. Perhaps you go after people as a bounty hunter, law enforcer, or killer for hire. Whatever form your hunting takes, you are trained in stalking your quarry and bringing it down. You are a dangerous individual. If you hunt animals or creatures, you might carry the trophies of past kills, such as teeth or skins. If you’re a bounty hunter, you probably wear whatever your quarry would find most intimidating so it feels as though it has no chance of getting away from you. Most hunters are Glaives, but Jacks and Nanos bring unique skills to the chase.  
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. That person once saw you show surprising mercy toward your prey, and now you hope they keep it quiet—it might harm your reputation.
2. Pick one other PC. You accidentally caught them in one of your traps, and they had to get free.
3. Pick one other PC. Back in your bounty hunter days (which may or may not be over), you were hired to track down someone who was close to this character.
4. Pick one other PC. You’ve noticed that it’s almost impossible to track this character, but you’re determined to figure out a way.
Additional Equipment: You wear boots that muffle your footsteps, giving you an asset on any roll made involving sneaky movement.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You can attempt an intimidating task to cause your foe to immediately surrender.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your foe pauses, terrified by your prowess, and takes no action on their turn.
Tier 1: Tracker. You are trained in following and identifying tracks. Enabler. Stalker. You gain an asset to all types of movement tasks (including climbing, swimming, jumping, and balancing). Enabler.


LIVES IN THE WILDERNESS
You dwell in the wilds. You probably have done so most, if not all, of your life, coming to understand the mysteries of nature, weather, and survival. The ways of flora and fauna are your ways. Your rough, rugged clothing shows little concern for style. Most of the time, covering yourself in natural smells to keep your scent from arousing suspicion in the wilderness is more important than bathing to keep yourself presentable to other humans. Glaives and Jacks are the most likely characters to live in the wilderness, perhaps working as guides, hunters, trappers, scouts, or trackers. A Nano who does so might be seen as a nature priest or wild wizard. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC who isn’t from the wilderness. You can’t help but feel a little contempt for that character and their “civilized” ways, which show disdain for all things natural and (to your mind) true.
2. Pick one other PC. This character is one of the few people that you are completely comfortable around, and you are often surprised at how easily you let down your guard near them.
3. Pick one other PC. This character once saved you from an uncomfortable social situation, and you still feel grateful.
4. Pick one other PC. This person seems to understand civilization in the same way that you understand the wilderness. You could choose to help each other or despise each other for this different way of seeing the world.
Additional Equipment: You have a directional compass.
Minor Effect Suggestions: A foe that is a natural creature flees rather than continue to fight you.
Major Effect Suggestions: A foe that is a natural creature becomes warily passive.
Tier 1: Wilderness Life. You are trained in two of the following: climbing, swimming, navigation, or identifying plants and creatures. Enabler. Wild Hardiness. You gain 3 points to your Might Pool. Enabler.


MASTERS DEFENSE
Protecting yourself is obviously important in dangerous situations, and you are particularly good at it. Cautious and prudent, you learn techniques to defend against all kinds of attacks, both physical and mental. The winner is often the last person standing, and you’ve done all you can to ensure that person will be you. You carry a shield and probably wear the best armor you can find. Glaives make excellent defensive masters, but Jacks and Nanos also find at least some of these skills of great value.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character protected you from harm recently, and you feel indebted to them for saving your life.
2. Pick one other PC. This person thinks you are an incredibly selfish person, perhaps based on their belief that you always save yourself first.
3. Pick one other PC. You once fought on opposite sides of a combat. 
4. Pick one other PC. This character seems to be a jinx for you. Whenever they are next to you, your Speed defense tasks are hindered.
Additional Equipment: You have a shield. 
Minor Effect Suggestions: You gain an asset to Speed defense rolls for one round.
Major Effect Suggestions: If an attack would hit you next round, it harmlessly strikes your shield instead if you choose.
Tier 1: Shield Master. When you use a shield, in addition to the asset it gives you (easing Speed defense tasks), you can act as if you are trained in Speed defense tasks. However, in any round in which you use this benefit, your attacks are hindered. Enabler.


MASTERS WEAPONRY
You have worked long and hard with one particular type of weapon: bows, swords, axes, daggers, whips, or whatever you choose. Thus, you are an archer, a swordsman, an axe master, a mistress of knives, or whatever is appropriate to your chosen weapon. A master of the rapier is different than a master of the warhammer, and an archer is different than a whip wielder. You might wear a symbol—a badge, a pin, a tattoo, an amulet, certain colors, or the like— that indicates the school in which you trained, the style of fighting you have mastered, or the name of your mentor. Your weapon is almost certainly your finest possession. Not only is it well cared for and of high quality, but you probably keep it in a beautiful scabbard, harness, belt, case, or something similar. Many Glaives are weapon masters, but sometimes a Jack might choose this path, particularly with lighter weapons.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. That character shows potential in the use of your weapon. You would like to train them, but you’re not necessarily qualified to teach (that’s up to you), and they might not be interested (that’s up to them).
2. Pick one other PC. If that person is within immediate range when you’re in a fight, sometimes they grant you an asset, and sometimes they hinder you (50% chance either way, determined per fight).
3. Pick one other PC. You once saved this person’s life, and they feel indebted to you. You wish they didn’t; it’s all just part of the job.
4. Pick one other PC. This person recently mocked your combat stance. How you deal with this (if at all) is up to you.
Additional Equipment: You have a highquality weapon of your choosing.
Weaponry Powers: If you have “supernatural” special abilities (such as some esoteries), these look like your chosen weapon. So the force blast of the Onslaught esotery appears to be a large weapon made of force, and the Flash esotery produces a flurry of weaponry. These alterations change nothing other than the appearance of the effects. As another example, Barrier becomes a wall of swirling blades of energy. This alteration changes the esotery such that it is not a solid barrier but rather inflicts 1 point of damage to anyone who touches it and 4 points of damage to anyone who passes through it.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The target is so dazzled by your expertise that it is dazed for one round, hindering all of its tasks.
Major Effect Suggestions: Make an immediate additional attack with the weapon as part of your turn.
Tier 1: Weapon Master. You gain a +1 bonus to damage with your chosen weapon. Enabler. 
Weapon Crafter. You are trained in crafting tasks associated with your chosen weapon. For instance, if your weapon is a bow, you are trained in tasks related to crafting bows and fletching arrows; if your weapon is a sword, you are trained in tasks for forging swords and sharpening blades; and so on. Enabler.


MURDERS
The murderous assassin is a master of dealing death. No one is better at sneaking into a location, eliminating a target, and slipping out again. Obviously, a professional killer is not likely to have a lot of friends. You probably wear dark colors—black, charcoal grey, or midnight blue—to help blend into the shadows. But since you’re also a master of disguise, in truth you could look like anyone. Any character could be an assassin. Jacks are the most likely choice, but Nanos with their esoteries or Glaives with their combat abilities would make efficient killers as well.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. That character knows your real identity, profession, and background. To all others, the truth about you is a closely guarded secret.
2. Pick one other PC. You were recently approached by someone who wanted to hire you to take that character out. You haven’t yet decided whether to take the job or warn them that their life is in danger.
3. Pick two other PCs. One night after perhaps too much celebrating, you loudly claimed responsibility for a murder you didn’t commit. These two characters were the only ones who heard. Whether they believe you or not is up to them.
4. Pick one other PC. That character is the one who got you started down the path of taking lives, whether they know it or not.
Additional Equipment: You start with a disguise kit and three doses of a level 2 blade poison that inflicts 5 points of damage.
Minor Effect Suggestions: No one but the foe notices that you make the attack.
Major Effect Suggestions: If you have poison amid your belongings, you were able to apply it just before the strike, adding the poison’s effects to the normal attack damage.
Tier 1: Surprise Attack. If attacking from a hidden vantage, with surprise, or before an opponent has acted, you gain an asset to your attack. On a successful hit with this surprise attack, you inflict 2 additional points of damage. Enabler.
Natural Assassin. You are trained in stealth and disguise tasks. Enabler.


RAGES
The berserker is a feared fighter who cannot be stopped. You put yourself into a howling battle frenzy that can make you a terror on the battlefield. You might hail from a less civilized society, perhaps even a tribal one. You likely wear little or no armor so as not to restrict your speed or maneuverability. Your clothing is probably simple and utilitarian. Glaives make the best berserkers.
connection:
1. Choose one other PC. You feel strangely protective toward that character and don’t want to see them come to harm.
2. Pick one other PC. That character knows a secret about your past that is tied to your Frenzy ability.
3. Pick one other PC. The first time you went into a frenzy was in an attempt to save their loved one from an attack. You failed, partly because of your inexperience.
4. Choose one other PC. That character is terrified by your rage and sometimes can’t help but flee at inopportune times.
Minor Effect Suggestions: When fighting multiple foes, you knock one into another, putting both off balance and hindering them for one round.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your foe is terrified of your rage and uses its next two actions to flee.
Tier 1: Frenzy (1 Intellect point). When you wish, while in combat, you can enter a state of frenzy. While in this state, you can’t use Intellect points, but you gain +1 to your Might Edge and your Speed Edge. This effect lasts as long as you wish, but it ends if no combat is taking place within range of your senses. Enabler.


RIDES THE LIGHTNING
The ancients harnessed electricity in strange and wonderful ways. Through practice and inherent ability (or the subtle use of hidden or implanted devices), you control the same energy. Not only can you create and discharge electrical power, but you can eventually learn to use it to transport yourself. You probably wear tight-fitting clothing that allows you to move quickly. Your garments might be blue and black, perhaps with a lightning-bolt motif. Although Nanos seem most suited to wielding lightning, Jacks can make good use of the varied lightning abilities.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character has been your friend for a long time, and you have learned to bring them along when you ride the lightning. If the character is standing right next to you, you can take them with you when you use the Bolt Rider or Electrical Flight powers. (Normally, neither ability allows you to transport other creatures.)
2. Pick two other PCs. You know about an important connection between them that even they don’t know about.
3. Pick one other PC. This character has interesting ideas about electricity and how it can be harnessed. If you are trained with machines, after you talk to this character for an hour, you gain an asset on any task involving identifying, crafting, or repairing a machine that uses electricity.
4. Pick one other PC. This character worst luck with electrical devices of anyone you’ve ever met. You want to help them, but you aren’t sure how or even whether they will be open to your assistance.
Additional Equipment: You have a bag of miscellaneous batteries and power cells. Whenever you find a new device that operates on batteries or cells (GM’s discretion), there is a 75 percent chance that the bag contains one that will power the device if it depletes.
Electrical Abilities: If you have abilities that would normally use force or other energy, they instead use electricity. For example, a Flash or an Onslaught force blast is a blast of lightning. This alteration changes nothing other than the type of damage and the fact that it might start fires.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The target is dazed by electricity for one round, hindering all of its tasks. Electricity can also shut down an automaton for one round.
Major Effect Suggestions: Devices filled with electrical power explode. You can target and destroy an artifact that a foe is holding or wearing.
Tier 1: Shock (1 Intellect point). Your hands crackle with electricity, and the next time you touch a creature, you inflict 3 points of damage. Alternatively, if you wield a weapon, for ten minutes it crackles with electricity and inflicts 1 additional point of damage per attack. Action for touch; enabler for weapon.
Charge (1+ Intellect points). You can charge an artifact or other device (except a cypher) so that it can be used once. The cost is 1 Intellect point plus 1 point per level of the device. Action.


SPEAKS WITH A
SILVER TONGUE
You are poetry incarnate. The words flow from your tongue like liquid metal. Your voice is golden and captivating. With enough time and focus, you can convince almost anyone to do almost anything for you, with you, or in spite of you. Words—words are what matter. You believe they have power. There’s a chance you don’t care much about your appearance, as long as you can say what you want to say. Some might call you the “face” because when your friends or allies need to put forth their best face, they send you. You’re a charmer. The word “charisma” was coined for people like you—there’s just something about you that people seem to like. Since words are important to you, you may have covered your skin with tattooed words or have written things on your outfit. You might play an instrument, write books, or compose songs in your spare time. Jacks, with their ability to take a related flex skill each day, make excellent speakers, but Nanos and Glaives might choose this route to inspire their companions.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. That character seems overly affected by your words. You’ve accidentally made them cry or laugh just by talking to them.
2. Pick one other PC. That character believes that you speak falsely and is never affected by your words.
3. Pick one other PC. You’d like to get to know them better, but don’t want to use your skills to do so.
4. Pick one other PC. That character would like to learn your storytelling techniques, and you’re trying to decide whether to teach them.
Additional Equipment: You have a book in which you keep notes of your favorite words, inspirational stories, and speech anecdotes.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The next time you attempt to influence, persuade, or deceive the same foe, the task is eased.
Major Effect Suggestions: You speak with extra conviction, increasing the effect, duration, or range of your action.
Tier 1: Poetic License. You are trained in all social interactions, including persuasion, deception, and intimidation. You also know two languages other than the Truth. Enabler.


TALKS TO MACHINES
Since you were young, you had an affinity for machines. It seemed almost like you were speaking to them. You were. You have the ability to use your organic brain like an intelligent machine, interfacing “wirelessly” with any electronic device. You can control and influence them in ways that others can’t. Intelligent machines are your friends and companions. You have also learned to repair machines of all kinds because the better they work, the better off you are as well. You likely wear a tool belt full of various implements, and machine oils stain your clothes and fingertips. All types of characters can spend their time talking to machines, although this practice is best suited to Nanos.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. That character seems to have a terrible relationship with machines—or at least the machines that you communicate with. If that person is next to a machine that you interact with in a friendly manner, that machine is treated in all ways as being 1 level lower than normal (unless doing so benefits you or them, in which case the level does not change).
2. Pick one other PC. That person seems especially leery of you, though this could just be your perception.
3. Pick one other PC. That character has a small machine among their equipment but won’t tell you any details about it or let you see it.
4. Pick one other PC. You know that this character knows an incriminating or embarrassing secret about you, and you hope that they do not reveal it.
Additional Equipment: A bag of small tools. Minor Effect Suggestions: The duration of influence or control is doubled.
Major Effect Suggestions: The duration of influence or control becomes 28 hours.
Tier 1: Machine Affinity. You are trained in tasks involving electrical machines. Enabler.
Distant Activation (1 Intellect point). You can activate or deactivate any machine you can see within short range, even if normally you would have to touch or manually operate the device. To use this ability, you must understand the function of the machine, it must be your size or smaller, and it can’t be connected to another intelligence (or be intelligent itself). Action.


WEARS A SHEEN OF ICE
Through your studies, you have learned to focus your natural talents to command the powers of ice and cold. People might refer to you as an ice mage. Sometimes ice mages are thought to come into conflict with those known as fire mages, but this is a fallacy believed by ordinary folks more than anything based in truth. You likely wear white or blue garments that are heavier than they need to be—unless you live in a cold region or wintry clime, in which case you probably wear less clothing than other people do because the cold doesn’t bother you. Most ice mages are Nanos, but a Glaive armored in ice, perhaps wielding an ice sword, would be quite impressive.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. Due to a quirk of the numenera, if that character is standing next to you when you use your Ice Armor ability, they are also protected by a sheen of ice. (They do not get the added protection of your Resilient Ice Armor ability.)
2. Pick one other PC. For a reason unknown to you, their very presence seems to heat the air around you, making it more difficult to command the powers of ice and cold. If they are within immediate range, their presence occasionally hinders your attempts to hit a target with a focus ability.
3. Pick one other PC. That person is especially susceptible to the cold that radiates from you. How they handle that vulnerability is up to them.
4. Pick one other PC. The two of you have a long history and almost always disagree about the best way to handle situations.
Additional Equipment: You have a bladed weapon made of stronglass that looks like ice.
Ice Abilities: If you possess abilities that would normally use force or other energy, they instead use cold and ice. For example, a force blast is a ray of frost. This alteration changes nothing other than the type of damage. As another example, Barrier creates a wall of ice. This alteration changes nothing except the wall’s appearance and the fact that it takes 2 additional points of damage from fire.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The surface around the target becomes slick and difficult to stand on.
Major Effect Suggestions: The target is covered in ice that slows its movement and hinders its tasks for one minute.
Tier 1: Ice Armor (1 Intellect point). When you wish it, your body is covered in a sheen of ice for ten minutes that gives you +1 to Armor. While the sheen is active, you feel no discomfort from normal cold temperatures and have an additional +2 to Armor versus cold damage specifically. Enabler.

WIELDS POWER
WITH PRECISION
Not only are you blessed with a great command of the numenera, but you are also trained to exploit esoteries in ways that elevate you above other Nanos. Some people believe that those who perform esoteries are born with the ability, but you know that skill and intelligence play important roles. The ancients created the numenera through knowledge, discovery, and intellect, and to use it properly, you must follow the same path. You probably wear spectacles and dapper outfits, carrying extra books, notebooks, and pens so you can continually focus on your studies and experiments. Nanos usually receive this instruction and focus, but some Jacks do as well. Glaives never do.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You’ve placed an immutable, one-time ward that renders them immune to the esoteries you perform unless they want to be affected.
2. Pick one other PC. Due to some quirk of the numenera, you can occasionally (and accidentally) share your powers with them, which gives them an asset on any task they attempt using their esoteries.
3. Pick one other PC. That character doesn’t seem to trust or like you, but you feel compelled to win them over.
4. Pick one other PC. You’ve noticed that they have a book in their possession that you’d very much like to study, but you’re unsure how to ask them about it.
Additional Equipment: You have an additional book about the numenera.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The special ability overwhelms and dazzles the target for one round, hindering it.
Major Effect Suggestions: The special ability terrifies the target, who uses its next two turns to flee.
Tier 1: Genius. Your Intellect Pool increases by 5 points. Enabler.


WIELDS TWO
WEAPONS AT ONCE
You bear steel with both hands, ready to take on any foe. You fight with two weapons in melee, sometimes called dual wielding. A fearsome warrior, quick and strong, you believe that the best defense is a strong offense. You probably sheathe one weapon on each side or both crossed behind your back. They are likely your most prized possessions, and you might have names for them. Many Glaives and Jacks train to fight with two weapons at once. Very rarely would other characters spend the time required to learn such a purely physical art, but it’s possible.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You have trained with this character so much that if the two of you stand back to back in a fight, you both gain an asset to Speed defense tasks.
2. Pick one other PC. This character always seems to inadvertently foil your actions, or at least make them more difficult. If they are within immediate range, actions related to this focus are hindered.
3. Pick one other PC. You recently had a weapon go missing, and you’re becoming convinced that they took it. Whether or not they did is up to them.
4. Pick one other PC. You used to dislike them immensely, but as you get to know this person, you’re growing more fond of them against your better judgment.
Additional Equipment: You start with an additional light melee weapon.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The target is intimidated and flees as its next action.
Major Effect Suggestions: You can make an immediate additional attack with one of your weapons.
Tier 1: Dual Light Wield. You can use two light weapons at the same time, making two separate attacks on your turn as a single action. You remain limited by the amount of Effort you can apply on one action, but because you make separate attacks, your opponent’s Armor applies to both. Anything that modifies your attack or damage applies to both attacks, unless it’s specifically tied to one of the weapons. Enabler.

WORKS THE BACK ALLEYS
The thief, the burglar, the pickpocket: these are the dangerous individuals who haunt the back alleys of every community. You are a thief in a city or town, making your livelihood at the expense of the wealthy. Your talents, however, prepare you for all kinds of pursuits, even when you’re not crouching in an alley or climbing into a window. Usually, you dress to blend in with the crowd. When you’re on a mission, black, form-fitting clothing allows you to swim in the shadows. Most thieves are Jacks, but Nanos make interesting burglars as well. A Glaive thief likely adds a little more physicality to their crimes.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. The character knew you beforehand and convinced you to leave your life of crime for other pursuits—at least temporarily.
2. Pick one other PC. A while back, you attempted to “borrow” something from this person, but they caught you in the process. You managed to convince them that it was a simple misunderstanding, but they may not entirely trust you.
3. Pick one other PC. You never seem to be able to hide so that this person can’t see you.
4. Pick one other PC. This character knows your real identity (if it’s a secret) or that you work secretly as a thief (if it’s a secret) and has kept the knowledge safe so far. It’s up to them whether they continue to do so.
Additional Equipment: You start with a bag of light tools.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You can immediately attempt to hide after this action.
Major Effect Suggestions: You can immediately take a second action during this turn.
Tier 1: Thief. You are trained in sneaking, pickpocketing, and lockpicking tasks. Enabler.


WORKS MIRACLES
You manipulate matter and time to help others and are beloved by everyone you encounter. Some people consider you a representative of the gods or a power from beyond this world. Perhaps they’re right—transdimensional experiments in the prior worlds might be what created the energies that you now wield. You probably wear simple clothes—nothing too flashy or stylish. There’s no need to call more attention to yourself. A Glaive who can heal himself is an interesting and dangerous proposition. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character quietly suspects that you’re a messiah or supernatural being.
2. Pick one other PC. This person knows a secret of yours, and you desperately hope that they do not tell anyone. You can choose whether or not you’re aware of their suspicion.
3. Pick one other PC. This character believes that you cured someone close to them of a deadly disease, and they are grateful. You aren’t sure whether you actually helped or if that person wasn’t as sick as was thought.
4. Pick one other PC. You secretly believe that this person might be a hypochondriac, and you’re never sure whether they actually need your help.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The target is healed for 1 additional point.
Major Effect Suggestions: The target is healed for 2 additional points.
Tier 1: Healing Touch (1 Intellect point). With a touch, you restore 1d6 points to one stat Pool of any creature. This ability is a difficulty 2 Intellect task. Each time you attempt to heal the same creature, the task difficulty increases by one step. The difficulty returns to 2 after that creature rests for ten hours. Action. 
========================================================
========================================================
========================================================
DESTINY


ABSORBS ENERGY
Every movement is an expression of energy. You can harness this kinetic energy and transform it into other kinds of energy. At first, once you absorb energy, you must use it before you can absorb any more. You can use the absorbed energy as a weapon, or you can infuse an object with dangerous energy that is released upon touch. Eventually, you will be able to use the energy for nonviolent purposes, such as healing or invigorating creatures. Glaives often gain the biggest benefit from being energy absorbers, as they are the ones most often being struck in combat, and many of the initial uses of absorbed energy are for combat. However, Wrights can potentially use some of that energy to improve their crafting abilities.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. For reasons unknown to you, this character is completely immune to the energy you release, whether you use it for help or harm.
2. Pick one other PC. You used to know this character years ago, but you don’t think they knew you.
3. Pick one other PC. You’re always trying to impress them, but you’re not even sure why.
4. Pick one other PC. This character has a habit that annoys you, but you’re otherwise quite impressed with their abilities.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The energy you release is even more potent than you thought. Your opponent’s actions are hindered next round.
Major Effect Suggestions: The energy you release is even more potent than you thought. Your opponent loses their next action.
Tier 1: Absorb Kinetic Energy. You absorb a portion of the energy of a physical attack or impact. You negate 1 point of damage you would have suffered and store that point as energy. Once you have absorbed 1 point of energy, you continue to negate 1 point of damage from any incoming blow or impact, but the residual energy bleeds off with a flare of harmless light (you cannot store more than 1 point at a time). Enabler.


ACTS WITHOUT CONSEQUENCES
You’re a rebel. You resist the dictates of authority, you try to break away from the control that society holds over you, and you like to flout traditions that you view as backward. That’s not to say that you automatically disagree with anything or anyone you deal with. It’s more that you believe certain institutions and conventions are foolish and even hurtful. This is why you often press your luck and defy the status quo. Often enough, you get away with it. In fact, your success is more than a mere twist of statistics. You enjoy some kind of psychic enhancement, implanted device, or attention of a datasphere spirit. You’ve also practiced certain skills, behaviors, and attitudes that allow blame to slip off you like water off a murden. Glaives, Jacks, Delves, and Arkai are drawn to acting without consequence. A character who acts without consequence often dresses in flamboyant garments designed to draw the eye, as if they’re tempting the universe to notice them after all. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. Through a quirk of fate, this character is sometimes blamed for your exploits, even if they’re not near you.
2. Pick one other PC. You recently discovered that they always seem to be able to track you when you Slip Into Shadow.
3. Pick one other PC. You saved them from certain death by taking a lucky gamble. It could’ve gone either way, but in the end, they lived. If you’d lost, they would’ve certainly died.
4. Pick one other PC. They rescued you from an awful predicament during one of the few times your luck failed you. You’re a bit embarrassed that they know you have limits.
Additional Equipment: Deck of cards and a “lucky” oddity of the GM’s choice.
Weird Ability: You can choose to learn Danger Sense instead of one of the abilities granted by your type.
Danger Sense (1 Speed point). Your initiative tasks are eased. You pay the cost each time the ability is used. Enabler.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your foe is surprised by or has a bad reaction to you for one round, during which time all its tasks are hindered.
Major Effect Suggestions: A foe forgets about you unless you draw attention to yourself.
Tier 1: Slip Into Shadow (2+ Intellect points). You attempt to slip away from a selected target and hide from view in a nearby shadow, behind a tree or a furnishing, or into the next room, even if in full view of the target. For each level of Effort applied, you can attempt to affect one additional target, as long as all your targets are next to each other. Action to initiate.
Blameless. You are trained in one of the following: deception, stealth, or disguise. Enabler.


ADJURES THE LEVIATHAN
You have the power to command the Leviathan—your name for the horrific things that wait in the empty ruins or hunt in the dark beyond the town walls, creatures with long teeth, hellish fury, and a hunger for human flesh. The Leviathan is the spirit of the predatory, the monstrous, and the sociopathic. Sometimes, you suspect the term applies to a specific variety of creature, all descended from a literal entity called the Leviathan—a bloodline you perhaps share in some small way, explaining why you can command and control these terrible creatures that preferentially hunt humans over all other flesh. Ninth Worlders are generally unaware of the Leviathan, but here and there, you run across pockets of people who know of the horrors of which you speak. Some believe it is a spirit that takes up residence in certain creatures, though others suggest the same as you believe: it is a strain of life that corrupts and changes what it touches. Metaphorically, it’s easy to say that all living, nonhuman predators are of the Leviathan. But you have a feeling, even if you’ve not said it in so many words yet, that one day a creature you encounter will be the Leviathan. Glaives, Jacks, and Delves are eager to command creatures that would otherwise try to eat them, putting a leash on them. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. A creature you control will take commands both from this character and from you. But if it ever receives conflicting commands, it turns on you both.
2. Pick one other PC. You captured a creature for this character, but it promptly tried to kill them. They still have scars from the incident.
3. Pick one other PC. You are pretty sure you can command that PC as a creature if you apply enough Effort (though you don’t think you can capture the PC). You haven’t tried, and you’re not sure you should; it might unlock some previously bestial part hidden inside them.
4. Pick one other PC. You saved them from a creature attack, and they owe you their life.
Additional Equipment: A leash.
Minor Effect Suggestions: One additional creature takes no action for a round.
Major Effect Suggestions: A creature you control takes an immediate extra action of your choice.
Tier 1: Adjure Creature (2+ Intellect points). For one minute, you can verbally control a living, nonhumanoid creature of up to level 2 within short range whose motive is some variant of “hungers for flesh,” commanding it to do simple tasks on your behalf. Alternatively, you can force up to three such creatures within range to take no actions for as long as you focus all your attention on them. Every round, each member of the group can attempt to escape your control. Whichever effect you attempt, you can apply Effort to increase the maximum level of the affected creature. Thus, to command a level 4 creature to do simple tasks on your behalf (two levels above the normal limit), you must apply two levels of Effort. Action to initiate.
Ninth World Bestiary Knowledge. You are trained in the lore of flesh-eating, nonhumanoid creatures—recognizing them, knowing their weaknesses, and knowing their habits and behaviors. Enabler.


AUGMENTS FLESH
WITH GRAFTS
Machines can be upgraded and improved, and the human body is just an organic machine. Your goal is to keep improving your physical form, replacing obsolete parts of your body with new grafts and trying to become supremely efficient at your normal and augmented biological processes. Whether you do this with technology or pieces from other creatures depends on what you find in your explorations and your estimation of your flaws and shortcomings. You don’t believe it’s possible to achieve perfection—perfection is an ongoing process, not a final state. If following this path makes you something more than human, so be it. You left behind childish toys and forms to become an adult, so you are willing to leave your humanity behind in order to become something greater. see grafting as a way to increase their physical power and survive attacks from dangerous opponents. Delves often have many opportunities to find and use grafts, and Wrights can use their own knowledge of the numenera to craft custom limbs and other body grafts for themselves.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. They have an ability you’d like as a graft, and you want to find a creature or cypher that duplicates that ability.
2. Pick one other PC. They once saved your life when one of your surgeries had a complication.
3. Pick one other PC. You think they’re offended or disgusted by your grafts, and you want to demonstrate the value of your abilities.
4. Pick one other PC. They’re interested in grafts, but you’ve rebuffed their requests because you think they’d have a fatal reaction to the surgery.
Minor Effect Suggestions: An upgraded body part is especially effective or efficient at a particular physical task. You gain an asset to similar actions involving the same task (such as making attacks against the same foe or dealing with a physical obstacle).
Major Effect Suggestions: Your foe is especially vulnerable to some aspect of one of your implants, like an allergy or radiation sensitivity. Make an immediate attack against that foe (using the same stat as the action that caused the major effect). If the attack succeeds, it deals 3 points of damage (ignores Armor).
Tier 1: Autodoctor. You are trained in healing, performing surgical procedures, and withstanding pain. You can perform surgeries on yourself, remaining conscious while you do so. Enabler.


BATTLES AUTOMATONS
Life is for the living—the biological. Automatons, animate machines, thinking machines, and anything similar are abominations. You excel at battling these anathemas, cleansing the world of their contaminating presence. Maybe your desire to battle automatons comes from religious zealotry. Maybe it’s steeped in revenge for some past crime committed by a machine. Maybe you don’t know why you’re driven to destroy animate machines. Maybe you’re just good at it. You probably bear the trophies of former “kills” on you, wearing bits of numenera on your belt or around your neck. You also likely use heavy weaponry, ideal for penetrating armor. Glaives are most often automaton fighters, particularly those who are quick and nimble, able to leap in, cutting a few vital wires here or slicing through a component panel there.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You suspect that this character is put off by your hatred of animate machines. You can choose whether or not they know of your suspicions.
2. Pick one other PC. You know that this character has suffered at the hands of automatons in the past, and perhaps you can convince them to help you in your calling. Regardless, you feel protective of them.
3. Pick one other PC. This character does not appear to share your feelings about automatons. In fact, you believe that they might secretly have machine parts.
4. Pick one other PC. This character comes from the same place you do, and you knew each other as children.
Additional Equipment: You have bits and pieces that you tore from the husks of automatons you have destroyed in the past.
Anti-Machine Abilities: You are trained in understanding numenera. In addition, if your type grants you special abilities that inflict damage, they inflict 1 additional point of damage to automatons and similar beings, and 1 fewer point of damage to biological, living targets. If you have abilities that normally would not work against automatons (like mind control), they will now. Enabler.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your automaton foe experiences an error for one round, during which time all tasks it attempts are hindered.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your automaton foe experiences a major error and loses its next turn.
Tier 1: Machine Vulnerabilities. You inflict 3 additional points of damage against automatons and animate machines of all kinds. Enabler.


BRANDISHES AN
EXOTIC SHIELD
Anyone can use a shield. But few can project a protective force field that crackles with otherworldly energy. Maybe your ability comes from a childhood encounter with a strange machine or a metallic nodule that protrudes above your flesh along your spine, or perhaps it is something that people in your family are capable of once every few generations. You use your force field to not only protect yourself, but to aggressively bash those who would do you harm. At first, you can create only a small protective plane. But as your skills improve, you can learn to throw it at foes and have it rebound, heal allies, and release an explosion of destructive energy each time it strikes home. Glaives and Delves are most likely to choose this focus.
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You overheard them say that anyone who uses a shield doesn’t really know how to fight. You’re looking for an opportunity to prove them wrong.
2. Pick one other PC. Someone related to this character gave you the plans to create, or themselves created, your shield.
3. Pick one other PC. You rescued them from a bad situation.
4. Pick one other PC. You’re drawn to them and don’t know why. There’s just something about them. A shared destiny? Or destined to become bitter foes one day?
Shield Abilities: If you wish, you can replace one of your tier 1 type abilities with Force Fall.
Force Fall (1 Speed point). If you fall, you can use your force field shield to absorb the impact of landing and gain +5 Armor against damage you would otherwise take from the fall. Enabler.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You bash your target and knock them prone.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your bash your target, and they are dazed for one minute, during which time their tasks are hindered.
Tier 1: Force Field Shield. You manifest a small plane of pure force, which takes on a shield-like shape with the barest flicker of a thought. You can dismiss it just as easily. To use the force shield, you must hold it in one of your hands. You are practiced in using your exotic shield in one hand as a light melee weapon; however, if you attack with both your shield and a weapon held in the other hand, both attacks are hindered. When you are unconscious or sleeping, the force field dissipates. Enabler. 

BREAKS DOWN WALLS
Through some modification of your body— mutation, mechanical enhancement, nanoreinforcement, or something else—you have the ability to smash through walls, destroy weapons, shatter shackles, break devices, and otherwise annihilate objects that would be difficult or even impossible for others to demolish. You’re a breaker. You do not flinch; you punch right through that wall, smash that machine, and fold the enemy’s metallic sword in half in an impressive and intimidating display. Depending on the method that gives you this ability, your act might be accompanied by flashes of energy, sound, or acidic odors. Once you display your impressive skills as a destroyer, your enemies sometimes surrender rather than face an apparent force of nature like yourself. You likely wear armor, but probably not the heaviest armor you can because you don’t want anything to slow you down too much. Breakers are often Glaives or Delves. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You accidentally struck this character once when you tried to break through a wall. It ruined your attempt and gave the character a nasty bruise that they claim still aches months later.
2. Pick one other PC. You’re certain this character appreciates your abilities and is as impressed as you are with the sound of walls being smashed. This may or may not actually be the case.
3. Pick one other PC. You and this character were childhood friends.
4. Pick one other PC. This character provides excellent covering fire while you break down walls. If they use ranged attacks in the same round as you make a charge attack, they can fire their weapon through the hole you just made.
Additional Equipment: A mechanism of some sort is fused with your flesh. You think it might have something to do with your ability to pierce solid material.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your feat of destruction thrills you. You gain an asset to Speed defense tasks until your next action.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your feat of destruction inspires you. You knock your opponent off their feet, and they lose their next action.
Tier 1: Breaker. You are trained in tasks related to damaging objects with the goal of breaking, piercing, or demolishing them. (It is a Might action to damage an object, and on a success, the object moves one step down the object damage track. If the Might roll exceeds the difficulty by two steps, the object instead moves two steps down the object damage track. If the Might roll exceeds the difficulty by four steps, the object moves three steps down the object damage track and is immediately destroyed. Brittle material reduces the effective level of the object, while hard material like wood or stone adds 1 to the effective level or 2 for very hard objects like those made of metal.) Enabler.


BUILDS TOMORROW
One of your favorite pastimes involves imagining what the skylines of the previous worlds might have looked like. Their inspiring heights, strange shapes, colors that human eyes can’t see, connections between structures that allowed the unknowable peoples of those bygone eras to step from one to the next . . . Well, you don’t know for certain what it must have been like, but you gain just as much pleasure imagining the future you will build, using the seeds of ancient knowledge as your guide for tomorrow. Are you a Wright, or are you some other type that has a keen interest in crafting? Although anyone can try their hand at crafting, someone who Builds Tomorrow has an advantage. Whatever else you wear, you likely have a belt strung with various spare parts, tools, and iotum, if you have any on hand. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character seems able to use all the objects and structures you craft with ease, even when you hide how to access certain functions.
2. Pick one other PC. This character knows a few things that can help when the objects or structures you crafted need repair.
3. Pick one other PC. This character has a special tool that you think would be perfect for your own set, but they regard it as a keepsake or are otherwise reluctant to give it up, even though they don’t seem to know what it’s good for.
4. Pick one other PC. When you were developing a plan from a seed of knowledge from the prior worlds, this character was burned in an unexpected incident. They still have a small scar.
Additional Equipment: You begin with one numenera plan for an installation or cypher of your choice and a bag of light tools. You also have 3 units of io, 3 units of responsive synth, and 3 units of parts.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You are elated with how well an object you crafted is functioning, easing Speed defense tasks for the next round.
Major Effect Suggestions: The object or structure creates some startling effect that causes the foe to lose their next turn.
Tier 1: Natural Crafter. You are trained in crafting numenera. Enabler.
Seeds of a Plan. You immediately gain two new plans to create any object of up to level 3 plus your tier. Each time you advance a tier, you can gain two additional plans of up to level 3 plus your tier. Enabler.
Starting Iotum. You have, find, or otherwise obtain a cache of iotum sufficient to build one installation or cypher that you have a plan for. Enabler.


DANCES WITH
DARK MATTER
You’ve felt the edges of something more real than the substanceless shadows that dance behind the light—something you dubbed dark matter. It responded to you, almost like a living thing. When you made shadow puppets, they were dark matter condensed and became briefly real. As you grew older, you learned to harness your gift for more than play. You can condense dark matter from thin air, pulling it from the void spaces or a transdimensional pocket that few others can access. You don’t fear dark matter, but others should when you’re around. Nanos, Jacks, and Delves probably get the most out of this focus. That said, an Arkus could parlay the sense of dread that accompanies anyone able to command darkness, bolstering their authority among many. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character also likes the dark. You both gain +1 on any die rolls when you collaborate on the same task, fight the same foe, and so on.
2. Pick two other PCs. You think you once saw them doing something illegal at night. You can choose whether or not to share that information. The characters can choose whether it was really them (it could have been neither, one, or both), and they may or may not share that information in return.
3. Pick one other PC. This person always seems to see you, even when you’re totally cloaked by darkness.
4. Pick one other PC. This character once flashed a cypher in your eyes so brightly that you were blinded for several days. You recovered, but you keep an eye on this character, just in case.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Darkness is drawn to your foe’s eyes, hindering any attacks the foe attempts on its next turn.
Major Effect Suggestions: Darkness thickens and momentarily clogs your foe’s throat like a wad of felt. Coughing and choking, they lose their next turn.
Tier 1: Ribbons of Dark Matter (2 Intellect points). For the next minute, dark matter condenses within an area within long range that is no bigger than an immediate distance in diameter, manifesting as swirling ribbons. All tasks attempted by creatures in the area are hindered, and leaving the area requires the creature’s entire action to move. You can dismiss the dark matter early as an action. Action to initiate.


DEFENDS THE GATE
You are a defender. Places are special to you, and seeing them overrun hurts your soul to its core. Perhaps you had a bad experience once, where a place that you loved was lost in war. After that, you vowed: never again. You sought out special training, and more than that, a connection to the nanites that some possess but most people think of as magic. This connection is conferred via mutation, a special device, psychic concentration, or some other method that links you to the numenera. Your connection grows over time, granting you the ability to defend a city, a wall, or even just a single but all-important gate. You probably wear obvious armor, perhaps even distinctive in its defensive nature. A few spikes and scowling faces worked into the pattern might discourage those seeking to get past you. Glaives are the obvious character to prefer this focus, though a Wright defending an installation might enjoy the additional protection this focus provides. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. Though you once defended this character from a foe’s attack, you weren’t completely successful. This character still bears a scar (it’s up to them where and how prominent that scar is).
2. Pick one other PC. You defended them once from an abhuman’s attack when they were debilitated. You were completely successful, saving this character’s life.
3. Pick one other PC. You’re always trying to impress this character with your strength, ability to withstand pain, capacity for drink, and so on. Perhaps they are a rival, perhaps you desire their respect, or perhaps you’re romantically interested in them.
4. Pick one other PC. This character seems to anticipate your next move almost before you begin it. When this character collaborates with you on the same task or defends the same area, both of you gain an asset to initiative tasks.
Additional Equipment: You have a strange device, either handheld or fused to your forearm. It might be purely decorative, or it might be related to your connection to the numenera.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The target is pushed back by your strong defense, so much so that it’s dazed for one round, during which time its tasks are hindered.
Major Effect Suggestions: Make an additional attack with your weapon on your turn.
Tier 1: Fortified Position (2 Might points). For the next minute, you gain +1 Armor and an asset to your Might defense tasks, as long as you haven’t moved more than an immediate distance since your last turn. Action to initiate.
Rally to Me (2 Intellect points). You cry out, blow a battle horn, or otherwise signal to everyone within very long range that you require aid. All allied creatures who respond by moving to within an immediate distance of you within the next few rounds gain one asset on any one attack or defense task within the next hour that you suggest, such as “hold the gate,” “charge that group of abhumans,” or something similar. Action to initiate.


DEFENDS THE WEAK
Someone has to stand up for the helpless, the weak, and the unprotected. You believe this duty falls to you, and thus you have spent much of your life watching out for the people around you. When you see them in trouble, you are the first to come to their aid. You might give up your last shin to help the hungry, take a beating to save a person from the same, or rally your friends to take on injustice wherever you find it. You probably bear many scars from previous conflicts, but for each scar, you likely also have a token of gratitude. You may have a dried flower given to you by a lady you saved from brigands, or a bit of metal given to you by a starving man you fed. Glaives typically take up the cause of the weak, having the grit, determination, and durability to face down dangerous threats. Jacks, however, may pursue these goals as vigilantes, while Nanos bring to bear fabulous powers in the defense of others. Delves are least likely to take up this cause, as they tend to be loners. On the other hand, Wrights and Arkai, many of whom have the good of others in mind at all times, are sometimes drawn to more direct methods of defending others. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You failed to protect this character at some point in the past, and you feel compelled to make up for your failure.
2. Pick one other PC. This character claimed innocence during a long-ago event, and you protected them. Now that time has passed, you’re not entirely convinced that they were blameless.
3. Pick two other PCs. They seem to think that you are more of an arbitrator than you really are, and they keep asking you to choose which one of them is correct.
4. Pick one other PC. They believe that one of the tokens of gratitude you carry came from their father.
Additional Equipment: You have a shield.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You can draw an attack without having to use an action at any point before the end of the next round.
Major Effect Suggestions: You can take an extra action, though you can use this action only to stand guard.
Tier 1: Courageous. You are trained in Intellect defense tasks and initiative tasks. Enabler.
Warding Shield. You have +1 to Armor while you are using a shield. Enabler.


DESCENDS FROM NOBILITY
You descend from privilege, wealth, and power. Your family once owned land (perhaps they still do), wielded political control, and accumulated vast wealth. You’ve stepped away from that somewhat, though you still carry a noble title, whether you want it or not. People sometimes recognize your name, and sometimes they recognize you as being descended from nobility. But with many areas being so isolated from each other, people in an area far from where you came from may never even have heard of the place where your family is known. Since you were raised a certain way, you probably dress smartly and carry yourself in such a way that inspires, endears, or intimidates. You have a voice suited to drawing attention (unless you choose to disguise it). 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character was once in service to your parents’ household, but you have since grown to think of them as a peer.
2. Pick one other PC. You’re pretty sure that they are descended from a rival house, even if they don’t know it.
3. Pick one other PC. You used your nobility—your influence, your wealth, or the promise of a favor—to intercede on this character’s behalf.
4. Pick one other PC. You were once very close with this character in the distant past.
Additional Equipment: A set of expensive clothing suitable for nobility.
Noble Advantage: If you wish, you can swap an ability gained from your type for the following. Servant. Your name entitles you to a level 2 follower. One of their modifications must be for tasks related to serving as your personal assistant. You can ask your servant to deliver things for you, run messages, pick up objects of interest or items on a list—pretty much whatever you want, within reason. They can also run interference if you’re trying to avoid someone, help hide you from the attention of others, help you muscle through a crowd, and so on. Enabler.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The next time you attempt to command, captivate, or otherwise influence the same foe, the task is eased.
Major Effect Suggestions: The foe is influenced, captivated, or otherwise affected by your ability for twice as long as normal.
Tier 1: Privileged Nobility. You are adept at claiming the rewards that a noble background can generate. When recognized, you can be seated at any eating establishment no matter how full, get a room in an inn even if that means others are turned out, be let into any court or other structure where laws are decided or nobility rules, be invited to any gala, and get a seat at a private function of any sort. In addition, you are trained in persuasion. Enabler.


EMERGED FROM
THE OBELISK
There is a gap in your memory lasting well over a year. One moment, you were marveling at the appearance of a floating obelisk. The next, you were waking up in a shallow crater, being helped up by a traveler. They witnessed you emerging from the side of that same obelisk, then falling and smiting the ground. Instead of dying, you made a crater, because your body was somehow changed and had become crystalline. You’ve tried to return to the obelisk in an attempt to determine what happened to you, but failed. Eventually, you hope to return. Until then, you explore, hoping to learn more about the numenera in general and master more of your own crystalline nature in particular. Any character type can have emerged from an obelisk, though the crystalline body they enjoy is most likely to be appreciated by Glaives and Delves. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. When your appearance raises concerns among other people who don’t know you, this character seems interested in giving you support and knowledge to help you fit in.
2. Pick one other PC. They saw you emerge from the obelisk and came to your aid.
3. Pick one other PC. They saw you emerge from the obelisk but thought you were a numenera device to be salvaged, which is how you got off on the wrong foot. It’s up to you whether you still hold a grudge.
4. Pick one other PC. In the past, this character has indulged you by listening to you wonder about your origins, how to get into obelisks, and why you might have been ejected.
Additional Equipment: A 1-pound (450 g) chunk of inert amber crystal.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your foe is dazed for one round, during which time all their tasks are hindered.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your foe loses their next turn.
Tier 1: Crystalline Body. You are composed of animate, translucent crystal the color of amber. Work with your GM to decide your exact form, though it is likely about the shape and size of a humanoid. Your crystal body grants you +2 to Armor and +4 to your Might Pool. However, you’re not quick and your Speed defense tasks are hindered. Certain conditions, like mundane diseases and poisons, do not affect you. Enabler.
Special Healing. Your crystalline body repairs itself more slowly than that of living flesh. You have only the one-round, one-hour, and tenhour recovery rolls available each day; you do not have a ten-minute recovery roll available. Any ability you have that requires a ten-minute recovery roll instead requires a one-hour recovery roll. Enabler.


EXPLORES YESTERDAY
What things were like long ago fires your imagination. You are equally thrilled to learn about how a dead civilization lived as you are to regain a still-functioning oddity, cypher, or iotum that the dead civilization used. For you, knowledge is an end in itself, but that doesn’t make you naive to the dangers exploration poses. The opposite is true, which is why you’re no slouch when it comes to defending yourself. You’re a born excavator and explorer, adept at moving and maneuvering, making discoveries, and resisting the dangers that forgotten places often hold. You probably wear sensible garments that can stand up to both rain and sun, as well as a hat or head wrapping to keep off the sun and extra water for when the trail peters out in the middle of nowhere. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character has been your partner in previous explorations, and the two of you work so well together that you both gain +1 to any roll when you collaborate on the same task, fight the same foe, and so on.
2. Pick one other PC. This character nearly drowned while following you on one of your excavations. It’s up to them whether they trust you enough to go exploring with you again.
3. Pick one other PC. They suspect that you were involved with criminals who stole from the Amber Gleaners. Whether you were or not is up to you.
4. Pick one other PC. You suspect this character possesses secret knowledge of a hidden tomb, lost city, or treasure. Whether they really do or not remains up to them to decide.
Additional Equipment: Bag of excavation tools.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You can take an extra action. You may use this action only to perform a movement-related activity or a knowledge-based activity, such as trying to climb a treacherous cliff or attempting to decipher strange cave markings.
Major Effect Suggestions: Speed defense tasks you attempt before the end of the next round are eased.
Tier 1: Trained Excavator. You are trained in perception, climbing, and salvaging numenera tasks. Enabler. 

FIGHTS WITH A HORDE
You were once part of a much larger martial society, where you held a position of elevated respect. The society might have been a tribe of abhumans, a military unit, a secret group of warriors that live in a limited dimension, or something else. Whatever the specifics (which you and your GM should work together to decide), you formed close personal ties with them and trained to fight in small and large groups alike. But at some point, you left, perhaps to seek your destiny, because you were exiled, or because everyone in the society spends a significant time away before returning to retire. Though you are gone, the lessons of teamwork and leadership that you learned while part of that society remain with you. Whatever you wear, it likely includes the symbol, insignia, or some other reminder of the group you left behind. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You’re related, either siblings or cousins, but were separated when you were young.
2. Pick one other PC. They’re a good fighter, but if you could teach them a few things about working together, they’d improve.
3. Pick one other PC. This character doesn’t seem to approve of your past association.
4. Pick one other PC. Long ago, the two of you were on opposite sides of a fight. You won, thanks to your association with your martial society. Whether they remember you or still hold a grudge is up to them.
Additional Equipment: A melee weapon you gained from your association with the martial society with their symbol or crest on the hilt.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your foe is knocked to the ground.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your foe is held immobile and can’t take their next turn.
Tier 1: Teamwork. Through example, acts of camaraderie, stories of martial prowess, or other forms of instruction, you and your allies work better together as a cohesive unit. During any round in which you rally your team (by spending 2 Intellect points as part of another action), you and your allies inflict 1 additional point of damage in combat. This benefit applies only to allies with whom you have spent the last 28 hours. It ends if you leave, but it resumes if you return to your allies’ company within 28 hours. If you leave for more than 28 hours, you must spend another 28 hours together to reactivate the benefit. Enabler.


FUSES MIND AND MACHINE
You believe that the finest machine ever created is the human brain, and experience and training have taught you that any machine can be improved. Through the use of implants and mechanical enhancements, your brain processes input faster, stores more information, and eventually can tap right into the datasphere. Mentally, you function on an entirely different level than your fellows. Did you make these improvements yourself? Did someone else? Was it with your blessing or against your will? Regardless, you are now more than just a person. You are both living creature and machine. But unlike someone who Augments Flesh With Grafts, all of your refinements and upgrades are on the inside. You don’t need mech eyes or metal arms to be enhanced. It’s all about what’s inside your skull. Nanos are most often those who fuse their mind with machines, but Arkai and Wrights are almost as likely to do so. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character knows a few things that can help when your implants and enhancements malfunction.
2. Pick one other PC. They seem to find you off-putting. You wonder if it’s because you’re clearly smarter than they are or if it’s for some other reason.
3. Pick one other PC. This character has a small device that can shut down your brain with a single switch. However, you don’t think they have any idea what it is or what it can do.
4. Pick one other PC. Within your memory circuits, you have data of someone who looks just like this character committing terrible crimes—hundreds of years ago. You have no explanation.
Additional Equipment: You have an artifact that protects your implants and enhancements from disruption or intrusion. Resisting such attacks is eased.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You foresee your foes’ moves so well that your Speed defense rolls for the next round gain an asset.
Major Effect Suggestions: Processing surge! On your next action, you can use points from your Intellect Pool on Might or Speed tasks.
Tier 1: Mechanical Assistance. You gain +4 to your Intellect Pool through the use of implants and tiny processing devices. Enabler.
Stored Memories. You are trained in one area of knowledge of your choice (history, geography, astronomy, and so on). Enabler.


HUNTS ABHUMANS
Abhumans are a threat to humanity. You know this more than anyone. The threat is obvious— bestial abhumans attack villages, caravans, and travelers all the time in the wilderness. But the threat is also far subtler. The progenitors of the abhumans were once human. They gave up their humanity to become horrific, monstrous things. How this happened, or how long ago, are things you cannot conceive. But you know that they are true, so abhumans must be eradicated for the good of all. Abhuman hunters are usually Glaives who wear tough but practical armor and carry a wide variety of weapons. But a Jack, Delve, or Nano could join their ranks as well, becoming decidedly more warriorlike than their fellows. Abhuman hunters spend much of their time stalking through the wastelands and desolate wilds as well as guarding what few roads and paths connect the towns and villages of the Ninth World. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character has had experiences with abhumans in the past, and you’d like to know more about them.
2. Pick one other PC. You are friends, and you’d hate to see this character harmed.
3. Pick one other PC. This character doesn’t understand just how dangerous and horrible abhumans can be.
4. Pick one other PC. Abhumans are sometimes drawn to certain people. They always seem to attack those people first and with more fervor. This character appears to be one such person.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your foe is so intimidated by your prowess that it backs away, unwilling to attack. It can still defend itself.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your foe is terrified by your skill and flees.
Tier 1: Tracker and Hunter. You are trained in tracking, looking for, interacting with, and hiding from abhumans. Enabler.
Abhuman Fighter. You inflict 2 additional points of damage when fighting abhumans. Enabler.


IMPARTS WISDOM
You’ve studied philosophy and other higher truths. But you do more than learn about such esoteric teachings; you practice them. Every day you consider hard questions or questions that everyone else has an easy answer for. That’s just the way you live. By focusing on things that bear on life, existence, and the underlying principles that guide the most sublime processes in the universe, you know contentment. Others often see in you a teacher, a higher being, or perhaps even some sort of savior. However, you see yourself as merely another student studying at the feet of eternity. You probably wear bright clothes and cloaks with many pockets for collecting bits of this and that for study, and you may have voluminous bags for your books. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character also yearns for enlightenment. You both gain +1 on any die rolls when you collaborate on the same task, fight the same foe, and so on.
2. Pick two other PCs. You have seen them, or someone who looked like them, stray from the path of wisdom before you became allies. You can choose whether or not to share that information. These characters can choose whether it was really them (it might not have been), and they may or may not share that information in return.
3. Pick one other PC. This character never seems to learn from you, and you both gain –1 on any die rolls when you collaborate on the same task, fight the same foe, and so on.
4. Pick one other PC. This character is so wrong in everything that you feel obligated to try to help them better understand the world. Whether or not the character is interested is up to them.
Wisdom Benefits: If you wish, you can swap an ability gained from your type for the following. Philosophic Confusion (1 Intellect point). Your esoteric words confuse a creature that can understand you, making it stand without taking actions as it attempts to pierce the puzzle set before it. For as long as you do nothing but pontificate (you can’t even move), the other creature takes no actions other than to defend itself, even over multiple rounds. If the creature is attacked, the effect ends. If you have a type ability that accomplishes the same thing, you can attempt to use either ability on two creatures at a time. Action.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You don’t have to use an action ahead of time to use your next Learning the Path or Imparting the Path ability.
Major Effect Suggestions: Intuition flares, and you can ask the GM one question about what you’re looking at.
Tier 1: Learning the Path (2 Intellect points). You observe or study a creature, object, or location for at least one round. The next time you interact with it (possibly in the following round), a related task (such as persuading the creature, attacking it, or defending from its attack) is eased. Action.
Philosophy. You are trained in two areas of knowledge of your choice.


LEADS
Using charisma, natural leadership, and perhaps some training, you command the actions of others, who follow you willingly. You are a commander, a captain, a leader, or a general. Your skills allow you to make people do what you want, but you also have the wisdom to know what actions would be best for your followers and allies. Since you need the respect of others, you probably dress and carry yourself in such a way that inspires, endears, or intimidates. You have a voice suited to barking orders that can be heard even on a noisy battlefield. Arkai are already leaders, so only a few will choose to further enhance their expertise. Glaives make excellent military leaders, but a Jack could easily lead a group of explorers or a den of thieves. A Nano might be the head of a group of “mages” or scholars, or they might have a gang of bodyguards as followers. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character was once a follower of yours, but you have since grown to think of them as a peer.
2. Pick one other PC. Independent and stubborn, they are not affected by your abilities.
3. Pick one other PC. They introduce you to the follower you gain at tier 2.
4. Pick one other PC. You were once very close with this character in the distant past. 
Additional Equipment: You have an artifact that allows you to tag up to seven followers. By looking into the glass plate on the device, you can determine their distance and direction relative to you. The tagging process is somewhat demeaning, so it is likely that only your followers would ever submit to it.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The next time you attempt to command, captivate, or otherwise influence the same foe, the task is eased.
Major Effect Suggestions: The foe is influenced, captivated, or otherwise affected by your ability for twice as long as normal.
Tier 1: Natural Charisma. You are trained in all social interactions, whether they involve charm, learning a person’s secrets, or intimidating others. Enabler.
Good Advice. Anyone can help an ally, easing whatever task they’re attempting. However, you have the benefit of clarity and wisdom. When you help another character, they gain an additional asset. Enabler.


LEARNS FROM ADVERSITY
You’ve been around, which means that you’ve experienced the pendulum swings that living delivers to every creature. No matter the heights that someone might attain, situations change, disasters happen, friends die, and mistakes are made. No matter how brilliant you might be, or believe yourself to be, those mistakes are often made by you. What distinguishes you from others is that you learn from those mistakes. You learn from the past and use experience as your guide. You’re older than many, but you’ve seen some amazing things in that time, and you can draw on that experience to do amazing things. As someone who’s survived the long years and trials of life, you probably dress simply and practically. Though older than most others who risk exploration, you remain fit, lean, and probably have either no hair or hair as white as the frozen water that’s said to cover the land in the far south. Glaives, Jacks, and Arkai are most likely to prefer the focus Learns From Adversity. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You languished in some kind of terrible situation until this character plucked you out of it. You learned a lot from that experience.
2. Pick one other PC. They don’t seem to think much of your experience.
3. Pick one or more other PCs. They came looking for help with a problem and found you. It’s up to them whether they’re satisfied with what they found or not.
4. Pick one other PC. This character believes you’re some kind of legend based on a decadeold story about you that’s grown in the telling. Sometimes, that makes you confident. Other times, it’s a lot to live up to.
Additional Equipment: A book filled with knowledge on a topic of your choice.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The range or duration of one of your abilities is doubled.
Major Effect Suggestions: You can take another action on the same turn.
Tier 1: Quicker Than Most. Experience has honed your reaction times, because those who act first gain the advantage in most situations. You’re trained in tasks related to initiative, seeing underlying patterns, and solving puzzles. Enabler.
Toughened Up. Adversity has made you tougher. You gain +3 to your Might Pool. Enabler.


METES OUT JUSTICE
There is so much injustice in the world. It takes a special person to take it upon himself to right wrongs, protect the innocent, and punish the guilty. You are such a person. Justicars, as they are sometimes called, are knights errant who wear armor, bear swords and shields, and travel the land looking for tyranny, corruption, and oppression. But some operate a little less ostentatiously, and sometimes justice comes from more subtle tactics. A justicar might also be a masked vigilante or just a badass who rights wrongs. The importance of justice in your life might come from religion, your upbringing, or your highly developed sense of principles. Regardless, you not only adhere to your values, but you also believe it is your calling to act on them and help make the world more just, more fair, and more ethical. You want to see wrongdoing punished. Although any character can be a justicar, Arkai and Glaives most often take on the role. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You strongly suspect that this character has a past that might involve serious crimes or wrongdoing. You have no proof, however, and you’ve never witnessed them doing anything seriously wrong.
2. Pick one other PC. This character seems to share your value systems and sees right and wrong the same way you do, which is refreshing.
3. Pick one other PC. This character, while ethical, defines right and wrong in different ways than you do.
4. Pick one other PC. In the past, you and this character witnessed an event that helped shape your moral code. They may or may not have come away with a similar outlook.
Additional Equipment: You have a shield to help you protect yourself and others.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You shame or intimidate your foe so much that they are shaken and use their next turn to flee.
Major Effect Suggestions: You mark your foe permanently with a distinctive scar so that their guilt will be known by all.
Tier 1: Make Judgment. You are trained in discerning the truth of a situation, seeing through lies, or otherwise overcoming deception. Enabler.
Designation. You assign an innocent or guilty label to one creature within immediate range, based on your assessment of a given situation or a predominant feeling. In other words, someone who is labeled innocent can be innocent in a certain circumstance, or they can be generally innocent of terrible crimes (such as murder, major theft, and so on). Likewise, you can declare that a creature is guilty of a particular crime or of terrible deeds in general. The accuracy of your assessment isn’t important as long as you believe it to be the truth; the GM may require you to give a rationale. Henceforth, your tasks to socially interact with someone you designate as innocent gain an asset, and your attacks against those you designate as guilty gain an asset. You can change your assessment, but it requires another designation action. The benefits of the designation last until you change it or until you are shown proof that it is wrong. Action.


MOVES LIKE A CAT
You are extremely dexterous. Your speed and agility make you almost a thing of wonder. Your body is lithe, flexible, and graceful. Your training—or perhaps a bit of magic or technology—allows you to move quickly and smoothly, land safely when you fall, and avoid danger. You likely wear tight clothing that doesn’t hinder you as you move. Likewise, you probably don’t allow yourself to be overburdened by a lot of equipment. You’ll wear armor only if it doesn’t slow you down. Glaives are very often catlike, but Jacks can be, too. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. Their occasional clumsiness and loud behavior irritate you.
2. Pick one other PC. This character comes from the same place you do, and you knew each other as children.
3. Pick one other PC. You aid them with advice and a helping hand when they need it. Anytime the two of you are next to each other, balancing, climbing, and jumping tasks are eased for them.
4. Pick one other PC. They owe you a significant amount of money.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You restore 2 points to your Speed Pool.
Major Effect Suggestions: You can take a second action this round.
Tier 1: Reflexes. You gain +5 to your Speed Pool. Enabler.
Balance. You are trained in balancing. Enabler.


NEEDS NO WEAPONS
You don’t use weapons—you are a weapon. With powerful punches, kicks, and full-body moves, you inflict incredible damage on your foes. By focusing your energy, the combined power of your body and mind allows you to do incredible amounts of damage without depleting your energy reserves. You might have gained your skills through intense training, various implants and enhancements, genetic mutations, or any combination of these things. Whatever the origin of your feats, you likely take good care of your body, ensuring that it remains the sharpest, most dependable weapon at your disposal. Martial artists or kasundas (as those with your training are sometimes called) are both feared and revered. They wear loose, comfortable clothing that allows them a full range of movement, and they rarely use weapons other than their body’s own implements (although some carry items designed to enhance their body movements for greater effect, such as knuckle weapons, knee spikes, or boot blades). Glaives are perhaps best suited for using their bodies as weapons, but Jacks are also good candidates. Sometimes, Arkai choose this focus because having a backup when persuasion fails is a useful leadership strategy. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. They seem to believe that the only true weapons are those that you can hold in your hand, and they might look at you with disdain.
2. Pick one other PC. This character seems incredibly unaware of their body and always happens to get in your way. If you miss your foe and accidentally hit someone else in close range, it’s likely to be them.
3. Pick one other PC. You once trained with a close friend of theirs, and you owe that mutual friend much.
4. Pick two other PCs. Once these two heard about your skills, they expressed interest in being your students. However, only one seems to have any aptitude.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You trip your target and knock them prone.
Major Effect Suggestions: You strike your target in a limb, making that limb useless for the next minute.
Tier 1: Fists of Fury. You inflict 2 additional points of damage with unarmed attacks. Enabler.
Flesh of Stone. You have +1 to Armor if you do not wear physical armor. Enabler.


NEVER SAYS DIE
You are as stalwart, hardy, and driven as can be imagined. When others are ready to quit, you’re just getting started. You probably don’t spend a lot of time on your appearance—it is far less important than your actions. For that matter, so are words. You’re likely not much of a talker. You’re a doer. Characters with this focus are sometimes called stalwarts or diehards. They are often soldiers, mercenaries, or other tough-as-nails individuals, but sometimes they take a more heroic stance. A character who is hard to kill is around longer to help others, after all. Stalwarts are most often Glaives or Delves, but Nanos and Arkai who like to stand at the back of the pack out of harm’s way can do serious damage as diehards. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You feel the overwhelming need to impress this character, although you’re not sure why.
2. Pick one other PC. This character seems quite capable, but in your mind, their spirit needs motivating. You’re constantly trying to convince them to keep trying, go the distance, and keep fighting the good fight.
3. Pick one other PC. You feel very protective of this character and don’t want to see them harmed.
4. Pick one other PC. This character comes from the same place you do, and you knew each other as children.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You restore 2 points to your Might Pool.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your next action is eased by two steps.
Tier 1: Rapid Recovery. Your ten-minute recovery roll takes only one action instead, so that your first two recovery rolls are one action, the third is one hour, and the fourth is ten hours. Enabler.
Push on Through (2 Might points). You ignore the effects of terrain while moving for one hour. Enabler.


POSSESSES A SHARD OF THE SUN
You have the ability to create and sculpt light, to bend it away from you or gather it to use as a weapon. Perhaps a shard of amber crystal, midnight stone, or other iotum became embedded in your flesh and through it you can control light. Or you might have always had the gift, a freak talent handed down to you by the ancients. Most people able to command light favor bright colors in their clothing since those colors reflect light rather than absorb it. Nanos and Delves tend to be the ones who possess shards of the sun, calling themselves light bearers or sun savants. They find its power useful for exploration and personal protection. Jacks appreciate how the abilities help them trick and elude foes, and Arkai like how they awe onlookers. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You have a strong emotional connection to this character, and when in their presence, you can change the color of the light you create.
2. Pick one other PC. They are especially perceptive to your light and occasionally your flashes leave them dazzled, hindering their defense tasks for a round.
3. Pick one other PC. Something about their nature dampens the light. Your light-based powers cost 1 additional Intellect point if they stand immediately next to you.
4. Pick one other PC. This character appears to have an oddity that was once yours, but that you lost in a game of chance years ago.
Additional Equipment: You have a crystal lens. When you shine light through it, the light extends for double the normal distance.
Radiant Abilities: If you perform esoteries or similar abilities, those that would normally use force or other energy instead use light and heat. For example, when you use Ward, light dapples your body and flares when you would be attacked, preventing your enemies from landing a solid blow.
Minor Effect Suggestions: A flash of light leaves the creature dazzled, and its defense tasks are hindered for one round.
Major Effect Suggestions: An intense flash of light leaves the creature blinded for one minute.
Tier 1: Enlightened. You are trained in any perception task that involves sight. Enabler.
Illuminating Touch (1 Intellect point). You touch an object, and that object sheds light to illuminate everything in short range. The light remains until you use an action to touch the object again, or until you’ve illuminated more objects than you have tiers, in which case the oldest objects you illuminated go dark first. Action.  

RADIATES VITALITY
You radiate a strange energy—a “biomorphic field” according to a nano you once met— that makes you tougher than others, with an ability to heal that outstrips that of normal people. The field seems to strengthen as you gain experience, and you’re certain that as it grows in power, you’ll be able to touch other creatures with it to sense their presence, heal them, detect their feelings, and possibly even hurt those who are revealed to be enemies. You might consider your biomorphic field a curse, the effect of a strange numenera item embedded in your flesh, a metallic amulet that keeps turning up no matter how many times you try to lose it, a genetic mutation (or genetic tweak from your forebears), or maybe even as the direct intervention of some prior-world deity that you hope to meet one day. However it came to be, it’s a fact that dangerous risks are lessened for you, though not completely without consequence; if you are damaged enough, the flame of vitality that you radiate will be snuffed out. You wear tough clothing that can withstand a lot, because even though you are mighty, regular clothing and possessions are not. Usually your biomorphic field is little more than a subtle sparkle, but when you use an ability, you radiate a momentary flash of gold light. Though anyone might find that coming back from death, at least in the short term, is a desirable trait, those who put themselves into harm’s way most directly, like Glaives and Delves, are likely to benefit the most from it. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. They were close to you in some fashion. The first time they saw you die, they grew despondent. When you returned, they were confused and upset. How they feel now, you’re not entirely sure.
2. Pick one other PC. Your ability to regenerate doesn’t seem to work as well around them.
3. Pick one other PC. They told you once that they worried your ability was the result of a potentially dangerous demon or alien parasite inhabiting your body. You don’t know how they feel now.
4. Pick one other PC. You once died to save them, but they don’t know it. You may choose whether or not to tell them.
Additional Equipment: You have a small, metallic pendant that always seems to turn up, even after you’ve apparently lost it or left it behind. It’s resisted all attempts you’ve made to scan, understand, or find out more about it.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You spontaneously regain 1 point in one of your stat Pools.
Major Effect Suggestions: You spontaneously regain 2 points in two of your stat Pools.
Tier 1: Mighty. Your biomorphic field sustains you. You gain +6 to your Might Pool. Enabler.


SEES BEYOND
Unlike most people, you know there are far more than three dimensions, more colors than can be found in the rainbow, and more things in the world than most can see, sense, or even understand. With practice and help (through drugs, lenses, manipulated energy fields, or a combination of all three), you can perceive things that others cannot. What you see in other dimensions has changed your understanding of even the most basic things like weapon and dress. Where others might see your drab outfit and plain weapons, you see something entirely different—myriad colors and patterns that showcase your unique vision of the world. Your weapons likely bear marks of other dimensions as well. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You are fairly certain that this character doesn’t believe that your abilities are real.
2. Pick one other PC. You see a gathering of energy and colors on this character that seem to imply they too can see beyond. Whether you ask them about it is up to you.
3. Pick one other PC. Whenever this character is near, your abilities seem to take longer and become more difficult.
4. Pick one other PC. Wherever this character goes, you are aware of the general distance and direction of their location.
Additional Equipment: You have a single item of your choosing—drugs, lenses, or a piece of the numenera—that helps you perceive things that others cannot. If you don’t have this item or something like it, tasks directly related to seeing beyond are hindered.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The period of concentration needed is cut in half.
Major Effect Suggestions: You see even more than you normally do and can ask the GM one question about what you’re looking at.
Tier 1: See the Unseen. You can automatically perceive creatures and objects that are normally invisible, out of phase, or only partially in this universe. When looking for things more conventionally hidden, the task is eased. Enabler.
 
SHEPHERDS THE COMMUNITY
You have an abiding affection for the community you live in, have adopted, or guard from afar. It’s not just the place, but also the people you want to keep safe and healthy and see have success in their life. Certainly, there are individuals within the community who are more troublesome than others, but unless they become an actual danger to the others, you include them in those you shepherd. To accomplish your goal, you’ve honed not only your ability to fight in order to preserve the community against invaders, but also your ability to understand the concerns of the community and persuade them toward smart decisions about the problems that face them now or could crop up later if not guarded against. Glaives make ideal shepherds, but Arkai and Wrights can also easily step into this role to supplement their other community-oriented abilities. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character grew up in the community you shepherd, and you are especially keen to see that they stay safe when they venture beyond it.
2. Pick one other PC. You originally thought they might be a danger to the community, which is why you introduced yourself, in order to discover if your first impression was correct.
3. Pick one other PC. This character is from a community that has been a rival of the community you protect, but you hope that maybe through them, you can build a bridge.
4. Pick one other PC. You hope this character will come to find as much comfort in your community as you.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your foe is so intimidated by your dedication that it backs away, unwilling to attack on its next turn. It can still defend itself.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your foe is terrified by your dedication and flees.
Tier 1: Community Knowledge (2 Intellect points). If you’ve invested yourself in a community and have spent at least a few months living there, you can learn things about it through a variety of methods. Sometimes contacts slip the information to you. Other times, you’re able to draw conclusions simply by what you can see and hear. When you use this ability, you can ask the GM one question about the community and get a very short answer. Action. 
Community Activist. When speaking to others in the community you foster, you are trained in persuasion and intimidation tasks about topics that directly relate to the community. Enabler.


SHREDS THE WALLS OF THE WORLD
When you move, your body changes state and becomes partially phased, reflecting a bizarre alternate dimension where distance and time are different than they are in the Ninth World. It’s only when you’re still that you remain solid and fully part of the real world. Sometimes that’s a relief, but other times you feel like you’re stuck in wet sand. Moving is your key to changing phase—and perhaps happiness. While you’re phased, you skate along the surface of reality far more quickly than others. Such rapid movement across normal reality sometimes leaves behind scratches, which you can selectively make, suppress, or bear down upon to create particularly devastating attacks and, eventually, phase detonations. You got your ability because you’re descended from an entity that hailed from the bizarre dimension of altered distance and time, because you were touched and ultimately spared by an encounter with the iron wind, or because of a mechanism that you carry or that is embedded in you. You probably wear clothing designed to stay out of your way, because the less you carry, the less likely you are to come out of phase prematurely. Characters who want to get around quickly, like Jacks and Delves, are most drawn to this type, though Nanos and Arkai who want to stay out of harm’s way might also be interested. 
connection:
1. Pick one other PC. For some reason, they never lose a sense of where you are, no matter how you sprint around, change phase, or even become invisible (to everyone else).
2. Pick one other PC. You recently discovered that if they stand near you when you begin a Phase Sprint, they become partially phased in the same way as you for one round, though they can’t sprint or use any other abilities of this focus.
3. Pick one other PC. Seeing you phase seems to trigger some unpleasant memory in this character. That memory is up to the other PC, although they may not be able to consciously recall what the memory might be.
4. Pick one other PC. Something about them interferes with your abilities. When they stand next to you, your focus abilities cost 1 additional point.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The target is dazed, and their next action is hindered.
Major Effect Suggestions: The target is stunned and loses their next action.
Tier 1: Phase Sprint (1+ Speed points). You can run up to a long distance as long as you take no other actions. During your action and until the beginning of your next turn, you are partially phased, and some attacks pass through you harmlessly. While phased, you gain an asset to your Speed defense tasks, but you lose any benefit from armor you wear. Note that some of your other special abilities enable specific actions that you can take while using Phase Sprint. For instance, when using Disrupting Touch, you can make one touch attack while moving (though this ends your movement). Action. 
Disrupting Touch (1+ Might points). You can turn your Phase Sprint into a melee attack by purposefully grazing another creature as you run. When you do, the touch releases a violent blast of energy that inflicts 2 points of damage to the target (ignores Armor). Whether you hit or miss, your movement (and turn) ends immediately, which puts you within immediate distance of your target. If you apply Effort to increase damage rather than to ease the task, you deal 2 additional points of damage per level of Effort (instead of 3 points); the target takes 1 point of damage even if you fail the attack roll. Enabler.  

THUNDERS
For you, sound is a tapestry of sensation that
surpasses light and perhaps even vision itself.
Existence is a soundscape of noise whose
meanings are not only clear, but insistent. You
can’t ignore them. Then again, why would you
want to? You’ve learned how to manipulate
sound by emitting both constructive and
destructive interference. At first, your
manipulations of the soundscape are brutal
and straightforward, but the more you learn,
the more you know that subtleties of sound
manipulation will not be beyond you for long.
Even so, you’ll exult the most when you allow
your abilities to thunder.
You got your abilities thanks to a weird
nodule that you salvaged in a ruin, because
you’re a mutant, or perhaps because you’re
partly (or completely) mechanical yourself.
Glaives and Delves are most likely to choose
this focus, but Arkai who want to impress their
followers may also choose to Thunder.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You can always hear
this character, even when the sound of your
abilities seems to drown everyone else out.
2. Pick one other PC. You suspect that this
character is slightly deaf, because they don’t
seem to react to your abilities like most others
do.
3. Pick one other PC. You once paid off a
large debt for this character. Whether they’re
grateful is up to them, and whether you think
you’re owed a debt in return is up to you.
4. Pick two other PCs. They both have
perfect pitch, which impresses you greatly.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The sound knocks
the target to the ground.
Major Effect Suggestions: The sound
deafens the target for about a minute, during
which time it is dazed.
Tier 1: Thunder Beam (2 Might points). You
direct a beam of focused sound at a target
within long range, inflicting 2 points of
damage and inducing a resonant destructive
wave in their body. Each round after this initial
attack, you can make another roll for the
destructive wave to inflict an additional 1 point
of damage to the target. If you fail this roll, the
destructive wave ends. Unlike the initial attack,
the destructive wave ignores Armor.
Alternatively, you can set up a destructive
resonance in a physical melee weapon
for one minute or until you let go of it. All
attacks made with the target weapon inflict 1
additional point of damage. Action to initiate.


TOUCHES THE SKY
The storm smells like life to you—like love.
Electricity charges the air, dances across
your skin, and connects you to the wind, the
weather, and the sky. That connection is due
to a device fused to your flesh, a mutation,
or just your training with the nanomachines
that suffuse everything. You issue commands
through that connection, and the weather
listens. The winds curl to your desire; they
lift you, protect you, and give you the power
to summon storms or break them apart. An
electrical storm, a blizzard, or—when your
mastery reaches its zenith—even a tornado is
something you can call up and loose upon the
world.
You probably wear sleek clothing designed
to stay out of your way when high winds roar
past you. Flaring coats, cloaks, and capes can
look dramatic, though, if you train yourself in
managing the excess fabric.
No matter a character’s type, the ability to fly
is something almost everyone desires.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You can’t affect this
character with your focus abilities, though you
don’t know why.
2. Pick one other PC. You recently discovered
that if they stand near you when you use your
tier 1 Hover ability, they too lift into the air.
They must remain within short range of you to
retain the effect, and it lasts only for as long as
you hover yourself.
3. Pick one other PC. Their parents (or
other loved ones) were killed in a freak storm.
When they discovered your connection to the
weather, they didn’t know how to react. They
either feel anger toward you or hope you can
help provide some answers; it’s up to them.
4. Pick one other PC. Something about them
interferes with your abilities. When they stand
near you, your focus abilities cost 1 additional
point.
Additional Equipment: You have a device
that sometimes crackles with electricity.
Whoever holds it is immune to your weather
abilities (but only if you willingly give it to
them).
Weather Abilities. If you wield powers that
would normally use force or other energy,
they instead use various effects generated
by extreme weather. For example, a blast
of energy could be a wind blast, a blast of
blizzard cold, or a small bolt of lightning. Also,
if you wish, you can swap an ability gained
from your type for the following.
Zap (2 Intellect points). You attack a foe
within short range with an electrical discharge
that inflicts 4 points of damage and dazes
your target so that its next action is hindered.
Action.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The target is
dazed, and their next action is hindered.
Major Effect Suggestions: The target is
stunned and loses their next action.
Tier 1: Hover (1 Intellect point). You float
slowly into the air. As your action, you can
concentrate to remain motionless in the air
or float up to a short distance, but no more;
otherwise, you drift with the wind or with
any momentum you have gained. This effect
lasts for up to ten minutes. If you also have
the Hover ability granted by your type, you
can hover for twenty minutes and move your
normal speed. Action to initiate.


WIELDS WORDS
LIKE WEAPONS
You are a talker. Maybe you got your start
telling stories, arguing with your siblings,
running a shop, and so on. You learned how
people think, how they respond to some lines
of argument and words more than others, and
how to apply that influence selectively. You
negotiate for your sake, on behalf of others, or
for a cause you believe in. Charismatic, your
natural talent shows through any time you
open your mouth to speak. You know when
it’s appropriate to joke, when to be serious,
and, sometimes, when an insult is required to
wound someone’s pride in just the right way to
get what you want.
You probably wear flamboyant or at least
fashionable clothes, and you use cosmetics,
tattoos, or hair stylings for dramatic effect.
Arkai and Jacks are most likely to have this
focus, given that it enhances abilities they
likely already possess.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character tends to
believe everything you say, even when you are
clearly joking. It’s up to you whether you want
to tone down your rhetoric when speaking to
them.
2. Pick one other PC. You convinced
them not to break up with their significant
other, thinking you were helping. Now the
relationship seems even more terrible, and you
regret your earlier action.
3. Pick one other PC. They’ve always been
there for you and helped you when you
couldn’t help yourself.
4. Pick one other PC. You both had a mutual
friend who died. You’re not sure whether this
character blames you or not.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The target is
dazed for a round, hindering all tasks they
attempt on their next turn.
Major Effect Suggestions: The target is
favorably disposed toward you for days or
more.
Tier 1: How Others Think. You have a sense
of how people think. You’re trained in one of
the following tasks: persuasion, deception, or
detecting falsehoods. Enabler.
Misdirect Blame (2+ Intellect points). Using
your clever words and knowledge of others,
you can attempt to alter the narrative so that
a target of up to level 3 within short range
becomes uncertain of its conviction in one
simple area, such as their conviction that you
just stole a fruit from their stand or their belief
that they’ve never met you before. This effect
usually lasts only for the period of time you
spend speaking, and perhaps up to a minute
longer, before the target realizes its error. In
addition to the normal options for using Effort,
you can also choose to use Effort to increase
the target level that can be affected. Afterward,
all your tasks to persuade or otherwise socially
interact with the target are hindered. Action.

========================================================
========================================================
CHARACTER OPTIONS 1


EXISTS IN TWO PLACES AT ONCE
One day, you looked into a mirror or another
reflective surface and noticed that the
reflection didn’t quite match your movements.
After some time, the image stepped free from
the surface and where there was one, there
were now two.
You have a doppelganger, a duplicate you can
call into existence when you wish. This duplicate
may be a quirk of your nature, brought on by
exposure to weird energy or a piece of scarcely
understood technology from the ancients. Then
again, this other might hail from another reality,
a branching timeline that may be similar to or
quite different from your own. Of course, the
copy could simply be a manifestation of your will
on a cloud of nanites that assume your shape
when you command them. Whatever the reason
for your ability, you can call forth the copy and be
in two places at once.
Your duplicate is your twin. It shares more
than your appearance. It duplicates your
mannerisms, manner of speech, expressions,
and habits. In effect, you have another you.
Nanos are the most likely to have this
unusual talent, for they dabble in forces most
people cannot begin to understand. Glaives
and jacks, however, often find themselves in
strange places and encounter weird energies
and may find the capabilities offered by this
focus useful in pursuit of their goals.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character finds
your talent unnerving and unsettling. For her,
the difficulty of any task made to help your
duplicate is increased by one step.
2. Pick one other PC. This character seems
convinced that you are really a pair of identical
twins with no actual powers.
3. Pick one other PC with a companion. This
PC’s companion seems to have an unusual
relationship with your duplicate.
4. Pick one other PC. You used to move
in the same social circles and knew of each
other, but you had never been introduced.
Four Hands Are Better Than Two: When you
and your duplicate work together to complete
a task, the difficulty of that task is decreased
by one step (if cooperation would be helpful).
Minor Effect Suggestions: For your target,
the difficulty of the next task it attempts
involving you or your duplicate before the end
of the next round is increased by one step.
Major Effect Suggestions: You have an asset
on the next roll you make within the next hour.
Tier 1: Duplicate (2 Might points). You cause a
duplicate of yourself to appear at any point you
can see within short range. The duplicate has no
clothing or possessions when it appears. The
duplicate is a level 2 nonplayer character with 6
health. The duplicate obeys your commands and
does as you direct it. The duplicate remains until
you dismiss it using an action or until it is killed.
When the duplicate disappears, it leaves behind
anything it was wearing or carrying at the time it
disappeared. If the duplicate disappears because
it was killed, you take 4 points of damage that
ignore Armor, and you lose your next action.
Action to initiate.


EXPLORES DEEP WATERS
You have nothing to fear from the depths.
You have always been a good swimmer, being
able to hold your breath longer than anyone
else, tread water for as long as you wanted,
and delve deeper into the swirling darkness
than your friends, all without stretching your
resources. The depths you so freely explore
harbor many secrets, and the waters that
shelter you become part of who you are, an
extension of your identity.
When you bother to wear clothes, you favor
snug, tight-fitting garments that stay close to
your skin and do not hamper your mobility.
Jacks, being versatile and adaptable,
are the most likely to explore deep waters,
though anyone can choose this focus. The
abilities it grants might result from special
equipment you make along the way, weird
transformations that began when you first
swam into the deepest, darkest places, or
simply an expression of an unusual gift.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. That character nearly
drowned while following you on one of your
expeditions underwater. The character’s player
can decide whether his PC would trust you in
such an environment again.
2. Pick one other PC. She knows something
about your past (possibly with the Redfleets)
that you wish she didn’t.
3. Pick one other PC. He suspects that you
were involved with pirates—perhaps even with
the Jaekels of Aras Island. Whether you were
or not is up to you.
4. Pick one other PC. She can’t swim very
well and fears open water. You believe that you
can help her overcome these issues, if she is
willing to let you.
Additional Equipment: You have a special
oddity that, when fitted in your mouth,
allows you to breathe underwater. The device
functions for up to four hours at a time, after
which you must wait four hours before you
can use it again.
Water Esoteries: If you perform esoteries,
those that would normally use force or other
energy instead use water or ice. For example,
Onslaught might create a wave of water that
crashes down on your target.
In addition, you can swap out one of the
esoteries you learned for the following.
Create Water (2 Intellect points). You cause
water to bubble up from a spot on the ground
you can see. The water flows from that spot
for one minute, creating about 1 gallon (3.8
liters) by the time it stops.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You can take an
extra action. You may use this action only to
move or perform a movement-related activity.
Major Effect Suggestions: The difficulty of
any Speed defense actions you make before
the end of the next round is reduced by one
step.
Tier 1: Diver. You can safely dive into water
from heights of up to 100 feet (30 m), and you
can withstand pressure when in water as deep
as 100 feet (30 m). Enabler.
Hold Breath. You can hold your breath for
up to five minutes. Enabler.
Trained Swimmer. While underwater, you are
trained in escaping, perception, sneaking, and
swimming tasks, as well as in tasks to identify
aquatic creatures and geography. Enabler.


FIGHTS DIRTY
You know one thing for certain: the only
important element of a fight is who wins. How?
Why? These questions are inconsequential.
Thus, you’ll do anything to win a fight. Some
might say you have no honor, no class, or some
other foolish statement, but they’re missing the
point. You come out on top in a battle—and
that’s all that matters.
You bite, scratch, kick, and trip. You tangle
foes in draperies, push them down stairs, and
throw dirt in their eyes. You trick them into
looking the wrong way, call them names, and
say terrible things about their mothers.
Maybe you learned your methods while
living in the streets, or maybe you barely
survived a particularly horrific battle in a
military campaign. Perhaps you simply have
never bought into the idea of rules or honor
when your life is on the line.
You’re likely to carry a few hidden tricks,
sometimes literally up your sleeve. You might
have a knife in your boot, a poisoned needle
in your ring, a razor in the hem of your cloak,
or a handful of stinging and itching powder in
a hidden pocket. Your clothing probably has
a lot of pockets, actually—more than a few of
them well hidden.
Glaives and jacks are most often dirty fighters,
but a scrappy nano who isn’t afraid to get into
the thick of things and use esoteries to enhance
her tricks would make a fine dirty fighter.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. He’s a good fighter,
but if you could teach him a few of your tricks,
he’d really excel.
2. Pick one other PC. In the past, she taught
you a few tricks to use in a fight.
3. Pick one other PC. This character doesn’t
seem to approve of your methods.
4. Pick one other PC. Long ago, the two of
you were on opposite sides of a fight. You
won, using your particular tactics. Now she’s
clearly interested in a (friendly) rematch at
some point and claims to be ready for you.
Additional Equipment: You have a weapon
that is easily hidden and a dose of level 3
poison that inflicts 6 points of damage.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You manage to
make your foe trip and fall prone.
Major Effect Suggestions: You tangle
something around your foe’s legs, and he not
only falls down but also loses his next turn.
Tier 1: Taking Advantage. When your foe is
weakened, dazed, stunned, moved down
the damage track, or disadvantaged in some
other way, the difficulty of your attacks against
that foe is decreased by one step beyond any
other modifications due to the disadvantage.
Enabler.
Liar. You are trained in all forms of
deception. Enabler.


FOCUSES TWO PERSONALITIES
Only lattimor characters can use this focus.
Lattimors are symbiotic entities. Their very
existence lies at the confluence of the bursk and
the neem. A few lattimors learn to bring together
these two disparate entities, creating a more
unified fugue state that capitalizes on bursk
strength and neem willpower. At the same time,
however, the two personalities are not lessened,
but rather enhanced. While the whole may be
greater than the sum of its parts, the parts are
heightened as the whole advances.
You are a lattimor who focuses both your
personalities to make each state—bursk, neem,
and fugue—greater. To most others, these
changes are likely not noticeable. However, to
those who know what to look for, the differences
are remarkable. You display more of the strengths
of each personality within the fugue state, and you
shift through your states much faster.

connection:
1. Pick two other non-lattimor PCs. Each
of these characters is close friends with your
bursk state or neem state, but not both.
2. Pick one other PC. When this character is
within close range, either your bursk state or
your neem state gets a +1 bonus to all rolls, but
the other state suffers a −1 penalty to all rolls.
3. Pick one other PC. This character seems to
have gone out of her way to gain an understanding
of lattimor psychology and physiology.
4. Pick one other non-lattimor PC. This
character was one of the first non-lattimors
you ever got to know.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You knock your
foe off its feet with your strength and size.
Major Effect Suggestions: Even as you
attack with your bursk sensibilities, you
size up your foe with your neem focus. The
difficulty of your next attack against the foe is
decreased by two steps.
Tier 1: Greater Fugue State. In addition to
being trained in perception, while in fugue
state you are also trained in breaking things
and all interactions with others. Enabler.
Easier Change. The default difficulty of
changing your state is 2 instead of 4. Enabler.


HUNTS ABHUMANS
Abhumans are a threat to humanity. You
know this more than anyone. The threat is
obvious—bestial abhumans attack villages,
caravans, and travelers all the time in the
wilderness. But the threat is also far more
subtle. The progenitors of the abhumans were
once human. They gave up their humanity to
become horrific, monstrous things ages ago.
How this happened, or how long ago—these
are things you cannot conceive. But you know
that they are true, so abhumans must be
eradicated for the good of all.
Abhuman hunters are usually glaives who
wear tough but practical armor and carry a
wide variety of weapons. But a jack or nano
could join their ranks as well, becoming
decidedly more warriorlike than their fellows.
Regardless, abhuman hunters spend much
of their time stalking through the wastelands
and desolate wilds as well as guarding what
few roads and paths connect the towns and
villages of the Ninth World.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character has had
experiences with abhumans in the past, and
you’d like to know more about them.
2. Pick one other PC. You are friends, and
you’d hate to see this character harmed.
3. Pick one other PC. This character doesn’t
understand just how dangerous and horrible
abhumans can be.
4. Pick one other PC. Abhumans are sometimes
drawn to certain people. They always seem to
attack those people first and with more fervor. This
character appears to be one such person.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your foe is so
intimidated by your prowess that it backs away,
unwilling to attack. It can still defend itself.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your foe is
terrified by your skill and flees.
Tier 1: Tracker and Hunter. When tracking,
looking for, interacting with, or hiding
from abhumans, the difficulty of the task is
decreased by one step. Enabler.
Abhuman Fighter. You inflict 2 additional
points of damage when fighting abhumans.
Enabler.


HUNTS MUTANTS
Mutants represent everything that is wrong
with your world. They are a scourge upon
humanity. They are a disease that must be put
down. You don’t necessarily take pleasure in
that—you don’t relish their eradication. But it
must be done for the good of the human race.
If this malady is not destroyed now, it will only
spread to future generations, and in greater
numbers.
You very likely have had experiences with
mutants in your past. You know that not
every mutant is a hideous monstrosity.
However, you also know that mutants who
are not obvious typically pose the greatest
threat because they can hide in plain sight.
As a mutant hunter, you know that it
takes special tools to fight creatures with
crazy powers and abilities. You have learned
to adapt devices to aid in finding mutants
and defending yourself against them. This
might mean imbibing or injecting chemicals,
nanites, or other strange treatments to even
the odds.
Jacks, with their wide range of abilities,
often make the best mutant hunters.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You believe that this
character might hate and fear mutants as
much as you do (although it’s up to that
character’s player as to whether this is true).
2. Pick one other PC. In the past, when you
were with this character, she was harmed by
a mutant, which helped inspire you to hunt
them in the first place.
3. Pick one other PC. This character seems
to believe that mutants should be left in
peace.
4. Pick one other PC. You worry that this
character might be a latent mutant.
Additional Equipment: You have a small
collection of items, such as chemicals and
nanites, that you believe aid you as you hunt
and destroy mutants.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your foe is so
intimidated by your prowess that it backs away,
unwilling to attack. It can still defend itself.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your foe is
disrupted and off balance and can’t use any
special powers that require an action for two
rounds.
Tier 1: Mutant Fighter. You inflict 3 additional
points of damage when fighting mutants.
Enabler.


MASTERS INSECTS
You are a master of the hive mind, controller
of those with compound eyes, friend to all that
fly and flitter. It’s a weird skill—as you’ve been
told far too many times—but you’ve seen the
benefits both in and out of battle, and you’ve
fully embraced it.
Your dress likely bears some mark of your
predilections. Perhaps you use goldgleam or
other insectoid elements to adorn yourself,
or perhaps your cloth is the rainbow hue of
a beetle’s back. Butterflies and other insects
sometimes alight on your person even when
you don’t purposefully call them.
The masters of insects are most often
nanos simply because dealing with insects
is mentally taxing, and they are usually the
characters best able to cope. These nanos are
sometimes called swarm lords.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This person seems
deathly afraid of some or all kinds of insects
and has a watchful eye on you.
2. Pick one other PC. Your insects are
attracted to this person for reasons you
cannot understand.
3. Pick one other PC. You are indebted to this
character for an act of kindness in the past.
4. Pick one other PC. This character has
an insect-shaped birthmark, mole, or other
feature. Does it mean something?
Additional Equipment: You have an oddity
that makes random insect noises when you
press a button.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The insect swarm
is particularly thick and angry, and everyone
within it suffers 1 point of damage this round.
Major Effect Suggestions: Everyone within
the insect swarm suffers 3 points of damage
this round.
Tier 1: Influence Insects (1 Intellect point).
Insects within short range will not harm you
or those you designate as allies for one hour.
Action to initiate.


METES OUT JUSTICE
So much injustice in the world. It takes a
special person to take it upon himself to right
wrongs, protect the innocent, and punish the
guilty. You are such a person.
Justicars, as they are sometimes called,
are often knights errant who wear armor,
bear swords and shields, and travel the land
looking for tyranny, corruption, or oppression.
But some operate a little less ostentatiously.
Sometimes justice comes from more subtle
tactics.
The importance of justice in your life might
come from religion, your upbringing, or
your highly developed sense of principles.
Regardless, you not only adhere to your
values, but you also believe it is your calling
to act on them and help make the world more
just, more fair, and more ethical. You want to
see wrongdoing punished.
Although any character can be a justicar,
glaives most often take on the role.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You strongly suspect
that this person has a past that might involve
serious crimes or wrongdoing. You have no
proof, however, and you’ve never witnessed
him do anything seriously wrong.
2. Pick one other PC. This character seems
to share your value systems and sees right and
wrong the same way you do, which is refreshing.
3. Pick one other PC. This character, while
ethical, defines right and wrong in different
ways than you do.
4. Pick one other PC. In the past, you and
this character witnessed an event that helped
shape your moral code. She may or may not
have come away with a similar outlook.
Additional Equipment: You have a shield to
help you protect yourself and the innocents
you find.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You shame or
intimidate your foe so much that he is shaken
and uses his next turn to flee.
Major Effect Suggestions: You mark your foe
permanently with a distinctive scar so that her
guilt will be known by all.
Tier 1: Make Judgment. You are skilled in
discerning the truth of a situation, seeing
through lies, or otherwise overcoming
deception. Enabler.
Designation: You assign an “innocent” or
“guilty” label to one creature within immediate
range, based on your general assessment of
a given situation or a predominant feeling. In
other words, someone who is labeled “innocent”
can be innocent in a certain circumstance, or
he can be generally innocent of terrible crimes
(such as murder, major theft, and so on).
Likewise, you can declare that a creature is
“guilty” of a particular crime or of terrible deeds
in general. The accuracy of your assessment
isn’t important as long as you believe it to be
the truth; the GM may require you to give a
rationale. Henceforth, the difficulty of tasks to
socially interact with someone you designate
as innocent is decreased by one step, and
the difficulty of attacks against those you
designate as guilty is decreased by one step.
You can change your assessment, but it requires
another designation action. The benefits of the
designation last until you change it or until you
are shown proof that it is wrong. Action.


PERFORMS FEATS OF STRENGTH
A lifetime of physical training rewards you with
incredible power. Your muscles ripple beneath
your skin, evident in your extraordinary build
and frame, and you can do things others
would not dream possible. You can haul
incredible weight, hurl your body through the
air, and punch your fist through doors.
Superior strength can manifest in many
ways. You could have the physique of a bodybuilder,
almost godlike in its perfection, or
you might be a lumbering, hulking monster
of a person, as heavy with fat as you are with
muscle. Then again, you could be short and
wiry, your strength belied by your slight frame.
Glaives are the most likely to perform feats
of strength.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You have been friends
with this character for as long as you remember
and often heed her advice and guidance.
2. Pick one other PC. For some reason—
nerves, perhaps, or attraction—he makes you
feel weak in the knees. You prefer if he stays out
of immediate range when you’re in combat.
3. Pick one other PC. You once carried
him from combat after he was wounded.
Whether he feels embarrassment, gratitude, or
something else is up to him.
4. Pick two other PCs. They have a game
where they ask you to perform harder and
harder feats of strength. Whether you play
along is up to you.
Additional Equipment: You have a heavy
weapon.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You knock the
creature to the ground.
Major Effect Suggestions: You send the
creature flying through the air so that it lands
on the ground in a heap 1d20 feet away from
you.
Tier 1: Athlete. You are trained in carrying,
climbing, jumping, and smashing. Enabler.
Strong. Your Might Edge increases by 1.
Enabler.


REFORGES COMPLETELY
Only varjellen characters can use this focus.
Varjellens can reconfigure their internal
structures in a process they call reforging. The
rare varjellen somamancer is one that learns
to take this process much farther, reshaping
its entire musculature, skeleton, and internal
systems for great advantage. It isn’t pretty,
and it isn’t easy, but it’s worth it.
Whatever you wear is probably loose, easy
to clean, and easy to put on and take off.
After all, when you need to reassemble your
internal organs, you don’t want to worry about
changing your clothes.

connection:
1. Pick one other non-varjellen PC. You
never seem to understand that character’s
moods or emotions.
2. Pick one other PC. He seems unduly
interested in your skills. It’s up to him whether
he is fascinated or disturbed by them.
3. Pick two other non-varjellen PCs. These
characters have said unkind things about
varjellens when they thought you couldn’t hear.
4. Pick one other non-varjellen PC. She
seems to understand varjellens better than
any non-varjellen you’ve ever known.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You restore 2
points to one of your stat Pools.
Major Effect Suggestions: The difficulty of
your next action is decreased by two steps.
Tier 1: Rapid Reforging. Your reforging can be
completed in an action, not an hour. Action.
Suitability: You have 3 additional points to
permanently distribute among your stat Pools,
as you wish. Enabler.


SEPARATES MIND FROM BODY
Your mind is to your body as a captain is to
her ship. Your body obeys your commands,
moving and behaving as you direct it, but at
any time you choose, your mind can wriggle
free from its container and explore the world
freely. When you project your mind, there are
few places you cannot go, few secrets that can
remain hidden from you.
You probably regard your body as merely a
vessel. As a result, you’re not likely to put a lot
of effort in style or keeping yourself especially
clean. Your clothing is likely tattered and dirty.
Nanos are the ones mostly likely to learn the
art of projection. Jacks, however, find projection
useful as it expands their options for snooping
around without drawing attention.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. Through a quirk of fate
or careful cultivation (your choice), you always
know where that character is in relation to
you. You are always aware of the direction and
distance you must travel to reach him.
2. Pick two other PCs. You believe that
while using your Third Eye power, you once
saw them engaged in something covert and
possibly illegal. It’s up to those characters
whether one, both, or neither were actually
involved.
3. Pick one other PC. For reasons beyond
understanding, your focus abilities do not
function when she is next to you and in your
field of vision.
4. Pick one other PC. He is fascinated by your
skills and wants to study you more closely. It’s
up to you whether or not you let him.
Additional Equipment: You possess an
oddity that looks like a silvery ball, about 3
inches (7.6 cm) in diameter. The ball’s highly
polished surface looks as if it reflects your
surroundings, but examining its surface
reveals it reflects the surroundings of another
location, one you have not yet found. In the
images shown on the ball, you have seen
many strange and unsettling things.
Mental Esoteries: If you have the
Mind Reading or Sensor esotery, you’re
automatically trained in it. If you have both,
you’re trained in both. Enabler.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You have an asset
on any action that involves using your senses,
such as perceiving or attacking, until the end
of the next round.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your Intellect
Edge increases by 1 until the end of the next
round.
Tier 1: Third Eye (1 Intellect point). You
visualize a place within short range and cast
your mind to that place, creating an immobile,
invisible sensor for one minute or until you
choose to end this ability. While using your
third eye, you see through your sensor instead
of your eyes using your normal visual abilities.
You may perceive the area around your body
using your other senses as normal. Action.


SIPHONS POWER
You are an energy vampire, draining power
from machines or living creatures. You use
this power to restore your own physical energy
reserves. Perhaps you take great joy in this
ability, or perhaps you grudgingly accept it
as a boon to yourself and your companions
and use it only when you must. Either way,
you are likely feared and unwelcome in many
communities for your dangerous powers. You
might try to conceal your true nature, dressing
so that you don’t attract attention and give
yourself away, or perhaps you flaunt it, using
the rumors to your advantage, wearing
black clothing and embodying a sinister
countenance.
Although most people assume that energy
vampires are usually nanos, glaives and jacks
can benefit as much or more from the ability
to siphon energy for their physical bodies.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character is immune
to your powers for some inexplicable reason.
2. Pick one other PC. This character appears
to think of you as some kind of monster.
3. Pick one other PC with a living or
machine companion. This character seems
convinced that you’re going to use his
companion for your own ill-gotten purposes.
4. Pick one other PC. You believe she can
help you control and understand your abilities,
if you can get her to talk about it.
Minor Effect Suggestions: When draining,
you gain 2 additional points to divide among
your Speed Pool and Might Pool.
Major Effect Suggestions: When draining,
you gain 5 additional points to divide among
your Speed Pool and Might Pool.
Tier 1: Drain Machine (2 Intellect points). You can
drain the power from an artifact or device you
touch, allowing you to regain 1 point per level of
the device. You can use this point to restore your
Might Pool or Speed Pool. You regain points at
the rate of 1 point per minute and must give your
full concentration to the process during this time.
The GM determines whether the device is fully
drained (likely true of most handheld or smaller
devices) or retains some power (likely true of
large machines). Action to initiate.


STANDS LIKE A BASTION
You are a wall. A stone. An island against a
storm of weapons and words. Nothing moves
you. Nothing even really dents you. Perhaps it’s
your physical size that lends you such stopping
power, perhaps you’ve enhanced your physique
with mechanisms and machinery, or perhaps
it’s merely your incredible strength of will that
forces foes to stay their swings.
Your armor is probably just like you: solid,
strong, and utterly impenetrable. Every
flourish and bit of flair—if you have any—does
double duty as protection.
Glaives are often suited for this focus, but wellarmored
jacks can sometimes step into this role.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You feel indebted
to this character and go out of your way to
protect her from harm.
2. Pick one other PC. You once saved this
character from a dangerous situation.
3. Pick one other PC. This character once
ran full bore into you while running away
from… something. You stopped him just by
being in the wrong place at the wrong time,
but he seems to hold it against you.
4. Pick two other PCs. You would like to
ask them to help you train by attacking you at
the same time, but you’re uncertain how to
approach them with this request.
Additional Equipment: You have armor of
your choice and a shield.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You add +2 to Armor.
Major Effect Suggestions: You regain 2
points to your Might Pool.
Tier 1: Experienced Defender. If you wear
armor of any kind, you gain +1 to Armor.
Practiced in Armor. You can wear armor
for long periods of time without tiring and
can compensate for slowed reactions from
wearing armor. You can wear any kind of
armor. You reduce the Might cost per hour for
wearing armor and the Speed Pool reduction
for wearing armor by 2. Enabler.


THROWS WITH DEADLY
ACCURACY
Sometimes you wonder if your hand and
your mind’s eye are connected in an intricate
perfection of timing and aim. Everything that
leaves your hand goes exactly where you’d
like it to and at the range and speed to make
the perfect impact. Your expertise might be in
carefully hewn throwing daggers and sisks, or
perhaps you use whatever’s nearby.
What you wear doesn’t matter, as long as it
doesn’t come between you and your throwing
implement. Lots of pockets, equipment
belts, and pouches make it easy to keep your
preferred weapons close at hand. You might
even have a hat with a variety of throwing
items tucked into its brim, ready to meet their
target with your perfect aim.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You believe that
this character shows potential for being an
excellent ranged attacker, but you don’t know
if she would be interested in the rigorous
training and practice required.
2. Pick one other PC. This character once
saved you from a dangerous situation.
3. Pick one other PC. You owe this character
10 shins.
4. Pick one other PC. He is always getting in
the way. If the GM determines that your attack
strikes the wrong target, it almost always hits
this character.
Additional Equipment: You have three
throwing weapons of your choice.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You hit your
target in the eye and blind him for one
round.
Major Effect Suggestions: You strike your
target in a limb, making that limb useless for
the next minute.
Tier 1: Precision. You deal 2 additional points
of damage with attacks using weapons that
you throw. Enabler.


TRAVELS THROUGH TIME
You have the unusual ability to travel through
time in a way others can never dream of.
You have likely experienced jumps where
time seems to have passed but you have no
memory of what happened. You probably also
suffer from déjà vu, sensing that you have
been in a situation or witnessed an event
before and are now experiencing it all over
again. You have begun to realize the extent of
your powers and work to master them so that
perhaps one day you can travel farther into
the future or deeper into the past.
Time travel poses many risks. Often,
you have no clear sense about what the
future might hold or what might have been
happening in the spot where you appear
when you travel to the past. Death waits for
the bold and the incautious.
Worse than mishap, you must guard
against paradox. When you change an event
in the past, you could inadvertently cause
the future to be rewritten. On the other
hand, cosmic forces may move in to correct
paradoxes by changing circumstances to
accommodate the revision, causing your
memories to become false ones when the
world you know changes to adapt to your
meddling. Of course, if you attempt anything
too radical, the universe might write you out
of existence so that your efforts to change the
past never occur.
You likely wear clothing and have personal
effects in a range of styles, choosing items
from many different periods. This eclectic
approach to your possessions may give you a
shabby appearance or make you look strange
and alien to others in the present.
Any type of character can have this focus,
though its power is extraordinarily rare.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You are either a distant
ancestor or a descendant of that character.
He served as a focal point for your travel and
anchors you to the present.
2. Pick one other PC. For some reason,
when you use your Anticipation power to look
ahead, you specifically see how her future
might unfold. You can choose whether or not
to tell her what you see.
3. Pick one other PC. You secretly believe
that he can also travel through time, since you
once fought a person who looked exactly like
him.
4. Pick one other PC. You once stepped
forward in time to save her from death, but
she doesn’t know it. You may choose whether
or not to tell her.
Additional Equipment: You have two
additional oddities.
Temporal Esoteries: If you perform
esoteries, time appears to slow down when
you use them. You and everything around
you moves in slow motion for a moment, and
then time snaps back into place. The temporal
distortion changes nothing about the effects
of your esoteries except for the appearance of
the world around you.
Minor Effect Suggestions: One creature you
choose within short range either acts first or
acts last during the next round.
Major Effect Suggestions: You step a few
moments into the future. To other characters, it
looks as if you disappeared. At the start of the
next round, you reappear and you have an asset
for any task you perform during that round.
Tier 1: Anticipation (1 Intellect point). You look
ahead to see how your actions might unfold.
You have an asset for the first task you perform
before the end of the next round. Enabler.

========================================================
========================================================
CHARACTER OPTIONS 2


ABIDES IN CRYSTAL
You possess an affinity with intricate
crystals, many of which were fashioned by
prior-world technologies. Crystals can store
information and energy, and you know that
matter can be transformed into either. You
can store yourself within crystals, or use
energy-infused crystals to enhance your own
form. Eventually, you can even use crystals
to travel limitless distances instantaneously.
You likely wear crystalline jewelry or other
adornments. And what’s more, you’re probably
interested in gathering additional crystals as
well. For you, they’re far more important than
shins or other simple treasures.
Although Nanos are likely to be crystal
fusers, Glaives gain perhaps as much if not
more benefit from the focus abilities.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You’ve noticed this
character seems to have an affinity for crystals,
and this makes them intriguing to you.
2. Pick one other PC. You’re drawn to
them and you don’t know why. There’s just
something about them. A shared destiny?
3. Pick one other PC. You’re missing one
of your crystals and you suspect they might
have taken it. Intentionally? By mistake? You
don’t know yet.
4. Pick one other PC. This character
comes from the same place you do, and you
knew each other as children.
Additional Equipment: You have four
crystals of different sizes and colors that
you value.
Crystalline Esoteries: If you perform
esoteries, those that inflict damage do so
by creating sharp shards of crystal that are
hurled with great force. Protective esoteries
use crystalline shields or armor. And so on.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Blinded by
a glint of light from one of your crystals,
the difficulty of an opponent’s actions is
modified by one step to its detriment.
Major Effect Suggestions: While within
a crystal, you are infused with additional
energy, and the difficulty of all tasks you
attempt is decreased by one step for ten
minutes.
Tier 1: Fuse Into Crystal (2 Intellect points).
You transfer your body and whatever you are
wearing and holding into a crystal at least
the size of your index finger. While in the
crystal, you are in complete stasis, unaware
of anything that transpires. You exit the
crystal when some predetermined trigger
occurs involving the crystal (it is tapped,
it gets ten degrees warmer, someone says
your name into the crystal, etc.) or when 28
hours pass, whichever comes first. If the
crystal is destroyed or significantly damaged
while you are within it, you immediately
exit, cannot act for three rounds, and move
two steps down the damage track. Action to
initiate.


ABUSES ALCHEMY
You’ve learned that alchemical concoctions
can make you more than merely feel good—
they can make you better! At least, they
can do so for as long as you keep taking
your special formulation of ingredients
that some might call drugs. Normally,
people who use drugs as often as you spiral
out of control and die early. But you’re
different, you tell yourself. You’ve leashed
yourself to a strict regimen of alchemical
substances that keep you from feeling the
effects of withdrawal, while at the same
time enormously enhancing your abilities in
particular ways.
Your acquaintances sometimes worry
you’re just a day away from a serious crash.
But what do they know? Everything is great,
you tell yourself. Confidence is another sideeffect
of your daily dose of amazing.
You probably wear dark clothing to
hide stains of your constant alchemical
experiments. Symbols for elemental
materials like water, fire, and various
specific substances might adorn that dark
clothing. Some who abuse alchemy wear
hoods or eye-covering lenses to hide wide
black pupils and bloodshot eyes.
Abusers are usually Jacks, but Nanos
can fall into alchemical dependence, too.
Those who choose this focus usually refer to
themselves as alchemical travelers. Everyone
else calls them alchemical abusers.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You’ve offered to
share your alchemical drugs with this PC in
the past, but you were rebuffed.
2. Pick one other PC. This character is
allergic to your ingredients, and possibly
even scandalized by your constant reliance
on drugs.
3. Pick one other PC. You and this
character were childhood foes.
4. Pick one other PC. You offered to share
your alchemical drugs with this PC in the
past, and your offer was wholeheartedly
accepted. So far, the dose you gave that PC
has had no effect. So far.
Additional Equipment: Bag containing
tools and ingredients for creating your
drugs, journal containing your drug recipes.
You have several weeks’ worth of your daily
alchemical dose prepared, and ingredients to
create several more weeks’ worth on hand.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your drug is
better than expected. You gain an asset to
Speed defense rolls for one round.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your drug is far
better than expected. You gain an asset to
Speed defense rolls and an asset to attack
rolls for one round.
Tier 1: Alchemical Dependence. You are
trained in alchemical tasks. In addition, you
take a daily regimen of special drugs you’ve
designed to work with your body in particular,
drugs that have slowly adapted your muscles
and organs, allowing you to accept still
more concentrated doses. In effect, you’ve
enhanced yourself with permanent abilities
while you keep taking your daily dose of drugs.
You can change your matrix of active
daily abilities by choosing to take a
different complement of drugs on a given
day, assuming you have the recipe in
your manual and ingredients for granting
yourself that ability. You can have only
one active ability of a given tier at a time.
To make the switch, spend ten minutes
studying your manual, preparing a new
alchemical concoction, and finally taking
it, after which time your activity ability is
changed out. You can choose to change
your active abilities up to twice per day,
immediately after a one-hour or ten-hour
recovery roll. Others who’ve taken your
drugs experienced life-threatening reactions
the few times you’ve experimented.
Choose one of the following abilities as
your active alchemical ability for tier 1.
Deadly Reflexes. You deal 1 additional
point of damage with every attack you make.
Enabler.
Densely Muscled. Your alchemical infusion
provides +1 to your Might Edge, and 3
additional points to your Might Pool.
Enabler.


BECOMES ENERGY
Whether through an implanted device,
an encounter with the Iron Wind that you
survived, or some other means, you gained
the ability to convert the bulk mass of
your body into energy. The first time you
used your ability, things could have gone
badly. Thankfully you figured out how to
restrain the energy you convert yourself
into so that it’s inert—except for a bright
glow—until you choose to discharge it. As a
being made partly or completely of energy,
you gain increased defenses, the ability to
unleash some of that energy as attacks,
and eventually even flight and the ability
to disintegrate objects. Using a fraction of
your converted mass hurts you a little at
first, until you learn to siphon off energy
from your surroundings to make up for that
deficit.
Nanos find the ability to become energy
especially useful for defensive purposes,
as an aid in getting around, and as an
impressive display of their abilities.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. They still have a scar
from when you accidentally burned them
with your energy.
2. Pick one other PC. When you almost
detonated the first time you used your
ability, this character helped you hold
yourself together, as it were.
3. Pick one other PC. This character
provided the means that led to you gaining
your ability to become energy.
4. Pick one other PC. This character
helped you when you were heartbroken over
the loss of another.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You get an
additional +1 to Armor for one minute with
Energy Skin.
Major Effect Suggestions: You blaze with
blinding energy. Nearby opponents are
blinded for one round.
Tier 1: Energy Skin (1 Intellect point). You
convert a thin outer layer of your skin into a
glowing shield of energy that gives you +1 to
Armor for up to one hour, until you dismiss
the effect and convert the shield back into
the outer layer of your skin, or until you
choose to release the charge using one of
your other abilities. Enabler.
Release Energy Blast. If you have
energized your skin (using Energy Skin), you
can release that energy in a blast that strikes
a single foe within long range for 5 points
of damage; however, you suffer 1 point of
damage (ignores Armor) as you lose part of
your mass if your d20 attack roll is an odd
(as opposed to an even) result. Action.


CHARGES RIGHT IN
Subtlety is not your strong suit. Tactics and
complicated plans are not your forte. You are a
straightforward soul who confronts problems
head on. You do not hesitate. You do not
blanche. With a mighty battle cry, you throw
yourself at your enemies, and wreak havoc
amid their ranks, sowing chaos and fear.
You likely wear armor, but probably not the
heaviest armor you can, because you don’t
want anything to slow you down too much.
Chargers are by far most often Glaives.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You feel as though
this character could use a little confidence
and encouragement to become more
fearsome and capable in battle.
2. Pick one other PC. This character
provides excellent covering fire for you while
you charge in. If this character uses ranged
attacks in the same round as you make a
charge attack, you inflict 1 additional point
of damage when you hit.
3. Pick one other PC. You and this
character were childhood friends.
4. Pick one other PC. When the other PCs
begin making elaborate plans, you attempt
to find a kindred spirit in this character,
dismissing any plan more extensive than
“charge!” and hoping they feel likewise (this
may or may not actually be the case).
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your charge is
faster and more agile than usual. You gain
an asset to Speed defense rolls until your
next action.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your charge is
more powerful than normal, and you knock
your opponent off their feet and they lose
their next action.
Tier 1: Quick to Act. You are trained in
initiative tasks. Enabler.
Charge Attack (1 Speed point). You can
move a short distance and still make an
attack as part of the same action, assuming
you are running toward your foe. Enabler.


CONCEALS THE TRUTH
When you were young, you learned that
lying was often easier than telling the truth.
Did you feed the seskii? Yes, mother.
What happened to that device your father
was studying? I don’t know.
As you grew older, your ability to
conceal the truth grew more mature as
well. You don’t necessarily lie because
you enjoy the thrill of power it gives you
over others (though you might); you lie in
order to accomplish the things that you
deem worthy, which might be every bit as
important as goals set by those who view
deception as a moral failing. You don’t care
what they think. The kind of people who
never lie are easier to lie to.
You probably wear conservative clothing
and carry books or other oddments that
give you a professional or modest air, all
of which makes you seem less likely to be
someone who constantly lies.
Jacks enjoy concealing the truth.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. They seem to
understand you and believe that your lies
are not an indictment of the true goodness
within you. The question for you: are they
right?
2. Pick one other PC. You never lie to this
character, though you don’t even know why
yourself.
3. Pick one other PC. You lied to this
character once, and it led to a tragedy. It’s
up to that character whether they’ve ever
forgiven you.
4. Pick one other PC. You owe that
character a fair bit of money, but you’ve lied
so convincingly that they think the debt is
paid up. In reality, it isn’t.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your lie is so
simple that the target hardly even thinks
twice about you, or what you’re doing.
Major Effect Suggestions: Not only are
you believed, your target will intervene on
your behalf to defend your good name.
Tier 1: Natural Born Liar. You have an asset on
all tasks related to deceiving others. Enabler.
Stealth Skills. You are trained in
your choice of one of the following
skills: disguise, deception, lockpicking,
pickpocketing, seeing through deception,
sleight of hand, or stealth. Enabler.


DEVOTES EVERYTHING
TO THE CAUSE
You’re going to make the world a better
place. You’re going to do so even if you have
to hunt down and eliminate everyone and
everything that stands in the way of that
higher ideal. You’ve lost too much, given too
much, and had too much taken away from
you to do anything else. Your choices were
to give up, or stand up. You’ve stood up and
adopted the cause as your own.
What’s your cause? Well, that’s up to you,
although it should be something that other
people would recognize as a good cause
greater than a single person. Your cause
should be something like “free the slaves”
or “eliminate the evil mutants,” not “enrich
myself” or “murder everyone not like me.”
Glaives are slightly more likely to devote
everything to the cause; however, Nanos,
Jacks, Glints, and Seekers could easily
decide to become idealistic icons.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. When you become
overwrought with the injustices of the
world, that character can calm you down
with a joke or a reality check.
2. Pick one other PC. You suspect that
they don’t believe in your cause. They
choose whether or not this is true.
3. Pick two other PCs. You’re pretty sure
that they at least believe in your cause, and
might even help you complete a mission or
two to that end.
4. Pick one other PC. In the past, this
character has indulged you by listening to your
rhetoric about the justness of your cause. They
choose whether or not this is still true.
Additional Equipment: A printed
pamphlet or booklet related to the purity
and truth of your cause.
Minor Effect Suggestions: After you
describe what you fight for, your foe must
process it and is dazed for one round,
during which time the difficulty of all tasks
it performs is modified by one step to its
detriment.
Major Effect Suggestions: After
interacting with you, your foe is seeded with
a grain of your fervor. If your foe survives,
several weeks later, they begin to act as if
they support your cause.
Tier 1: Fanatic. Your devotion pays
dividends. Long study, practice, and exercise
means you gain 4 additional points to
your Pools, divided up as you wish. Each
time you gain a tier, you can choose to
redistribute these 4 points as you wish.
Enabler.
Masterful. You are trained in a knowledge
skill related to your cause.


FELL FROM
ANOTHER WORLD
You were not born of the Ninth World.
Yet now you find yourself living in a place
layered by the ruins of prior civilizations,
peopled mostly by oddly ignorant
yet strangely potent and sometimes
compassionate humans. This magnificent
spectacle may have been what drew you,
though it’s more likely it was an accident of
fate that brought you to this alien planet.
Whether you came from another world,
another dimension, or another time, you
must make the best of it and try to succeed.
Even if you seek to find your homeworld
or want to make a new life for yourself
on Earth, you must cultivate friends,
knowledge, and experience to survive in the
present. Because that’s what humans do.
Some aliens look incredibly strange, while
some look exactly like humans. Most fall
somewhere in between.
Any type—be it Glint, Glaive, or Jack—is
equally as likely to have fallen from another
world.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character freaks
out your exotic companion. Sometimes your
companion hides when this character is too
near. Other times it acts as a creature of +1
level for a short period.
2. Pick one other PC. This person thinks
you’re an abhuman. You might be fine with
that.
3. Pick one other PC. You once joked that
you could read their mind. Whether they
found that exciting or utterly terrifying is up
to them.
4. Pick one other PC. This was the
character that first found you after you
fell from another world and were hurt,
confused, and afraid. They helped you get
on your feet.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your latent
power for telekinesis sporadically kicks in,
making your foe drop its weapon.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your latent
power for telepathy kicks in stronger than
ever, mind-jolting your foe so that it loses
its next turn.
Tier 1: Uncanny. You unsettle humans and
other creatures that haven’t met a person of
your heritage before. You can capitalize on
that reaction and use it as an asset in most
social interactions, whether you’re able
to persuade someone because they give
undue credence to your oddness, intimidate
someone for the same reason, or deceive
someone who can’t read your tells. Enabler.
Alien Knowledge. You’re trained in one
esoteric knowledge skill; that skill could
be the numenera or something related to
higher math, the history of your world, the
mechanics of time travel, and so on.


FIGURES THINGS OUT
You’re a natural when it comes to applying
your brain to a problem and coming up with
a workable solution. The world is a chaotic
place, filled with unpredictable people,
situations, and weird technology from the
prior worlds. Rather than focusing on one
narrow specialty, you prefer to step back and
take in the broader picture, analyze all the
facets of a problem, and let true knowledge
emerge. When others are left confused and
wondering, you’re the one able to figure
things out.
You probably carry an additional slim
pack where you collect oddities, notes about
unexpected situations, and stray bits of lore
that you haven’t yet memorized, as well as
your journal.
Seekers, Nanos, and Jacks are most
drawn to this focus.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. If it wasn’t for you,
they would never have made it through a
difficult situation.
2. Pick one other PC. You figured out that
they have a secret that they haven’t told
anyone yet. You don’t know what that secret
is, but you can tell it weighs on them.
3. Pick one other PC. Based on a couple
of comments you’ve overheard, you suspect
that this character thinks brawn and force
are the solution to most problems, not
reason.
4. Pick one other PC. When this character
stands next to you, you have a hard time
concentrating. You’re not sure why.
Additional Equipment: A journal and quill
where you can jot down your observations
and analysis.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You don’t have
to use an action observing to make your
Applied Observation or attempt at Filling in
the Details.
Major Effect Suggestions: Intuition flares,
and you gain an asset on your task.
Tier 1: Applied Observation. You observe
or study a creature, object, or location
for at least one round. The next time you
interact with it (possibly in the following
round), the difficulty of a related task (such
as persuading the creature, attacking it, or
defending from its attack) is reduced by one
step. Action.


FORGES A BOND
The greatest bond is friendship. True
camaraderie, particularly in difficult
situations, forges ties and bonds that
cannot be severed except in death itself.
You know that you can count on your
closest friend no matter what, and you’ll do
anything to ensure that she feels the same
way.
You gain special abilities when you draw
upon this bond if your friend is close at
hand. The drawback is that when you are
separated, you’re both worse off.
To use this focus, you must choose
another PC. The player of the other character
must agree to this arrangement. You gain
all the abilities of the other character’s
chosen focus, and you both gain bonuses (or
penalties) based on this focus.
You and your friend are so close that you
finish each other’s sentences, and seem to
always be in sync. You like the same things.
You even dress alike.

connection:
1. Your friend (the PC you have chosen) is
a lifelong friend.
2. Your friend (the PC you have chosen)
and you hit it off immediately, forging a
bond very recently, but very quickly.
3. Your friend (the PC you have chosen) is
actually your sibling or close relative.
4. Your friend (the PC you have chosen)
was reluctant at first, but you won them
over.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your bonded
friend is so impressed by your action that
they gain an asset on their next task.
Major Effect Suggestions: The bond
between you and your friend is strengthened
to the point that one of you (you both agree
on the choice) can take an immediate
additional action.
Tier 1: Share Focus. You pick one person
to be your closest friend—a friend so
close that you forge a bond that takes on
supernormal qualities. You gain any and all
abilities of your friend’s focus, and you both
gain abilities (and potentially drawbacks)
from your focus (this one).
Bond. Whenever you and your friend are
within immediate distance, one of you (but
not both) gains an asset on whatever task
they attempt in a given round. The two
must mutually agree each round who gets
the asset. Unfortunately, if you and your
friend are not at least within long range of
each other, the difficulty of all tasks for both
of you is increased by one step. If one of
you ever dies, the difficulty of all tasks for
the other is increased by one step for a year.
If you are alive but your friend isn’t, after
this year, you can choose a new person to
bond with. Enabler.


GAZES INTO THE ABYSS
Crail, but you’re a monster. You’re big, ugly,
and hideous, and children and grown adults
alike instinctively know your secret heart—
you’d like to eat them. But you try not to.
It’s your constant struggle to retain control
of your monstrous instincts that urge you
to rend and eat anyone who gets too close.
Whether because you were found and raised
by good people, you were once a human
that was terribly changed, or you decided
that giving in to red lust always and forever
wasn’t what you wanted, each day you gaze
into the abyss that is your own savage soul,
then try to look away.
A monstrous beast could be large
and hairy, with lots of teeth; squamous,
slimy, and many tentacled; filmy, soft,
and obscenely similar to animate internal
organs; or something else.
You either wear clothing that tries to hide
your true nature while you’re in public, or
not much clothing at all, depending on how
close to a village or city you are, or how
much equanimity your companions have
regarding your hideous appearance.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. They are clearly
terrified of you. You are determined to show
them that you’re not going to lose control,
and give them a key to your manacles.
2. Pick two other PCs. They know that it’s
beneficial for you to kill and eat a creature
every few days, and they often work together
to make sure that happens.
3. Pick one other PC. That character is
able to soothe you. You’ll never attack them,
and if they’re in danger, you’ll go berserk
trying to save them.
4. Pick one other PC. You worry that you
may have been responsible for killing one
or more of their loved ones when they were
younger.
Additional Equipment: Manacles and
hobble that you sometimes ask your friends
to secure you with, just in case.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The target is so
intimidated by your bestial attack that it is
dazed for one round, during which time the
difficulty of all tasks it performs is modified
by one step to its detriment.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your foe is
disrupted and off balance by your bestial
attack, and can’t use any special powers
that require an action for two rounds.
Tier 1: Beast. Your monstrous form is both
powerful and hideous. You gain +4 to your
Might Pool, and +1 to your Might Edge.
Enabler.
Natural Weapons. You can make a melee
attack with your claws, teeth, tentacles, or
whatever you are equipped with. The attack
inflicts 4 points of damage. Action.


LIKES TO BREAK THINGS
You enjoyed smashing whatever you could
get your hands on when you were a child.
You still do. You’re burly, so destroying
stuff comes easy. The sound things make
when they shatter is magical. In fact, every
material has its own particular tenor.
You’ve shattered so many things that you’re
developing a knack for seeing the weak
point not only in objects, but also in people,
and in some cases, in the way people think,
plan, and dream. It’s up to you whether
you want to exploit that talent or continue
mostly with breaking objects, which don’t
cry and make you feel guilty afterward.
Glaives and Seekers have the greatest
propensity for breaking things.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You promised that
character to break the first thing they named
to you, whatever it was. They haven’t yet
taken you up on your offer.
2. Pick one other PC. They wrongfully
accused you of smashing something they
treasured. Later they apologized, and you’ve
mostly forgotten the incident. Mostly.
3. Pick one other PC. You broke a
keepsake that character kept, and hid the
evidence. That character has no idea you did
it, and just thinks they lost the object. You
haven’t told them the truth, and now worry
too much time has passed to come clean.
4. Pick one or more other PCs. You
accidentally destroyed a bridge that you and
they were using at the time. Everyone was
hurt, and one other former comrade was
killed in the incident.
Additional Equipment: You carry a
hammer.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The difficulty of
the next task to break something is reduced
by one step.
Major Effect Suggestions: The object held
by the NPC shatters.
Tier 1: Feat of Strength (1 Might point). The
difficulty of any task that depends on brute
force is decreased by one step. Examples
include smashing down a barred door,
tearing open a locked container, lifting or
moving a heavy object, or striking someone
with a melee weapon. Enabler.


LIVES ON THE ROAD
You are a traveler. Experienced travelers
are rare in the Ninth World because of the
hazards involved, but you are up for these
challenges. You thrill to the idea of exploring
new places. Wanderlust makes you grow
anxious if you stay in the same place too long.
Being on the road means you’re adaptive.
New situations don’t bother you (in fact,
you thrive on them). The road is a dirty,
dangerous place at times, but you’re
resilient and resistant to harm and disease.
Travelers wear tough, practical clothing
and often a wide variety of gear. Because
you’re always picking up new things as you
visit places, your clothing and equipment
are a hodge-podge of different cultures and
styles.
on the road, as they are very adaptable.
But truly, anyone who walks the long and
winding paths (or blazes whole new trails)
that cross the world is a fellow traveler,
regardless of their other skills.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. The character has
been your longtime traveling companion.
You know many of each other’s foibles,
preferences, and secrets.
2. Pick one other PC who is not from your
hometown. Not only do you know where
they are from, but you seem to know more
about that place than they do.
3. Pick one other PC. Whether it’s true or
not, you feel that character always seems to
need your help in whatever they do.
4. Pick one other PC. You have taught
them a smattering of one of the languages
you know.
Additional Equipment: You start with an
explorer’s pack. If you already have one, you
can instead take an extra change of clothes,
rations for two more days, and two minor
glowglobes.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your action
impresses those around you. People who
were unsure of you are now willing to at
least listen to what you have to say.
Major Effect Suggestions: As you succeed,
you say precisely the right thing, and the
difficulty of all social interaction tasks
pertaining to one person who can see and
hear (and understand) you is decreased by
two steps permanently.
Tier 1: Hardy. You gain 4 additional points to
your Might Pool. Enabler.
Multilingual. You are fluent in an additional
language of your choice. Enabler.


MAKES SOMETHING
OUT OF NOTHING
All the world is a vast puzzle, one you’re
able to solve. Where others see junk, you
see the shape of what all the pieces could
be. Sometimes you combine objects to
create something new, and other times you
chip away everything that doesn’t look like
the thing you want. The more you learn,
the more you’re able to make, up to and
including numenera devices. However,
improvising a weapon from whatever
happens to be lying around can be just as
impressive when the unexpected happens
and time is of the essence.
You probably wear a vest or coat with
many pockets for your tools.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. That character seems
to disturb your concentration in a way that
you can’t explain. If they are standing next to
you, all your crafting and improvisation tasks
prove one step more difficult.
2. Pick one other PC. For some reason
that isn’t immediately clear, they are able to
use all the weapons, armor, and tools you
improvise as if practiced.
3. Pick one other PC. Recently, they
accidentally (or perhaps intentionally) lost
your previous set of tools. You’re not sure if
it was a joke or an accident, but you’re wary
of a repeat incident.
4. Pick one other PC. They dislike disorder
and messes of all kinds, and refer to your
knack for making something out of nothing
as “playing with junk.” You hope that
crafting something beautiful for them will
change their mind. It’s up to that player how
their character responds to the experience.
Additional Equipment: A pack of light tools.
Minor Effect Suggestions: An item you
improvise, jury-rig, or craft is of even better
quality than you intended, and is one level
higher than normal.
Major Effect Suggestions: An item you
improvise, jury-rig, or craft has an additional
ability, use, or effect. For instance, if you
improvise a club from a table leg, a perfectly
positioned nail means the weapon inflicts 1
additional point of damage.
Tier 1: Improvise (3 Intellect points). When
you perform a task in which you are not
trained, you can improvise to gain an asset
on the task. The asset might be a tool you
cobble together, a sudden insight into
overcoming a problem, or a rush of dumb
luck. For example, you could improvise
a weapon from a table leg to serve as a
medium club, a shard of crystal to serve as
a light dagger, a stone to serve as a light
thrown weapon, and so on. If need be, you
can even use your fist as a light weapon.
Likewise, you can improvise a shield from
a small table, a chair, or other object larger
than a breadbox that you can hold. Enabler.
Craftsperson. You are trained in a
crafting skill in which you are not already
trained. Choices include, but are not limited
to, the following: bowyering/fletching,
leatherworking, glassblowing, armoring,
weaponsmithing, woodcrafting, and
metalworking. Enabler.


MANIPULATES FORCE
Weaving together the fundamental forces
of existence to create a bubble of invisible
protection is an achievement that some
presume only adepts of the prior worlds can
accomplish. But through an accident, some
unique device(s), or unfailing effort on your
part (or some combination of all of these),
you have learned the trick of manipulating
pure force. At first, you use it for protection,
but as your mastery grows, you learn to
use it to bend light and manipulate objects
around you.
Nanos and Jacks are most drawn to
manipulating force.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. They don’t believe
you can create invisible fields of force.
After all, neither they nor anyone else can
see anything. You suspect that they might
actually be very interested in your abilities.
You’ve even caught them going through
your things once trying to find the answer to
what you can do.
2. Pick one other PC. In the recent past,
when creating a bubble of force around
yourself, the invisible force pushed that
character over a precipice to a long fall.
They barely survived. It is up to the player of
that character to decide whether they resent,
fear, or forgive you.
3. Pick one other PC. They are on the run
from an organization that they owe money
to. You protected them when thugs came to
rough the character up in the recent past.
Now the group is looking for both of you.
4. Pick one other PC whose focus
intertwines with yours. This odd connection
affects them in some way. For example, if
the character Delved Too Deeply, your ability
might be to create force bubbles that block
that character from the effects of light. If
she Fell From Another World, she doesn’t
suffer the penalty of interacting with things
outside your protective force sphere. And
so on.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The duration of
the effect is doubled.
Major Effect Suggestions: An important
item on the target’s person is destroyed.
Tier 1: Bubble of Protection (1+ Intellect
points). You are surrounded by an invisible
bubble of force that provides +2 to Armor
for one minute. The bubble is permeable
to your intentions, but not perfectly. Tasks
that require you to manipulate or interact
with objects that you’re not carrying is one
step more difficult while the bubble is up.
This includes attacking targets outside
the sphere (but does not include attacks
you make using Invisible Force at tier
3). For each level of Effort you apply, the
bubble provides an additional +1 to Armor;
however, the difficulty of interacting with
and attacking objects outside the sphere
also increases by one step. Action to create.


PLAYS TRICKS
Whether you’re a performer, a thief, a Nano,
a Jack, or a simple wanderer, you delight in
fooling, confounding, and surprising others.
Some of your tricks are meant to charm
and entertain. Others are more useful for
getting out of tight corners and confusing
your foes. Even if you’ve got others’
best interests at heart, you’ve probably
accidentally hurt or confused your friends
with your antics in the past, so you try to
avoid making that particular mistake in the
future.
You probably wear a garment with several
concealed pockets, from which you can
produce hidden shins and other oddments
of guile.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You’re jealous of
their finery.
2. Pick one other PC. You suspect that
they are part of a secret organization, but
you don’t know if you should be more afraid
for them or of them. Perhaps if you perform
tricks for them, you’ll discover their true
nature.
3. Pick one other PC. You once tricked
them so completely that they attacked and
hurt you, thinking you were a foe. You’ve
healed, but both of you are still wary of each
other.
4. Pick all the other PCs. You tricked them
into believing you are someone that you are
not, and now it’s been so long, you’re not
sure if you should reveal the truth.
Additional Equipment: Disguise of your
choice and 10 shins.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your foe
loses track of you and moves just out of
immediate range before realizing its error.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your foe is
confused by your antics. On its next turn, it
attacks one of its allies instead of you before
realizing the truth.
Tier 1: Legerdemain (1 Speed point). You can
perform small but seemingly impossible
tricks. For example, you can make a small
object in your hands disappear and move
into a desired spot within reach (like your
pocket). You can make someone believe that
they have something in their possession
that they do not have (or vice versa). You
can switch similar objects right in front of
someone’s eyes. Action.
Wit or Menace. Choose whether you’re
trained in pleasant social interactions
(including persuasion) or negative social
interactions (such as intimidation).


PROVIDES SUPPORT
The world is a hard place filled with danger
and loss. You might know that firsthand.
But instead of becoming bitter and vowing
revenge on the world, you chose a healing
path. Many people are worthy of being
helped, healed, and supported in their
endeavors. And you’re the perfect person to
provide that care. Doing so helps keep you
grounded, at peace, and keeps the shadows
from your dreams at night.
Helping others instead of yourself means
you might not have the richest cloak or the
finest shoes, or know what it’s like to wear
anything other than secondhand garments.
However, you also have mementos given to
you by those you’ve helped in the past, like
the oddity that hums a tiny melody, given to
you by the man you saved from aggressive
abhumans.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You helped that
character break into a stranger’s home
because they said that something within
was stolen and belonged to them. Now
that time has passed, you’re not entirely
convinced of their story.
2. Pick one other PC. That PC knew you
during a period of your life when you were
not helping others, but instead exploiting
them, or at least ignoring the plight of those
in need. They don’t know why you changed.
It’s up to you whether you want to tell them.
3. Pick one other PC. You helped their
mother out of a hard situation.
4. Pick one other PC. You’ve seen that
character admiring your healing skills many
times. Perhaps they would like a lesson.
(You won’t know until you ask.)
Minor Effect Suggestions: An ally is
inspired and regains 2 points to a Pool.
Major Effect Suggestions: You can use
your Healer ability without having to use
an action at any point before the end of the
next round.
Tier 1: Healer. You are trained in healing
tasks. Enabler.
Good Advice (1 Intellect point). You have
a clear mind for determining the best way to
proceed. When you give another character
a suggestion involving his next action, the
difficulty of that action is reduced by one
step. Action.

SHAPES LIQUID
Energy can mold liquid—particularly liquids
with invisible particles dissolved into their
essence—into any shape and texture. It can
change its tensile strength, its hardness,
and its durability. You can control this
energy, and therefore can craft liquid more
precisely and much more instantaneously
than a craftsman shapes wood or stone.
You can take a bit of water, infuse it with
nanoscopic particles, and make it into a
sword, a jerkin, a rope, or—eventually—a
wall or even a cypher with moving parts and
complex circuitry.
Nanos make the most obvious liquid
shapers, but any character can benefit from
these abilities. A Glaive that can create their
own weapons or a Jack who can instantly
have any tool they need would certainly have
an advantage.
You very likely carry a large container with
liquid in it wherever you go.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character seems
to doubt your abilities, so you’ve decided to
prove yourself to them.
2. Pick one other PC. You were once
partners with this character on another
venture that went poorly, through no fault of
either of you.
3. Pick one other PC. You have no idea
why, but your abilities do not function if you
are touching this character.
4. Pick one other PC. This character owes
you money.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your creation
lasts twice as long as normal.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your creation is
either two levels higher than normal or adds
an asset to tasks involving its use.
Tier 1: Create Liquid Item (1 Intellect point).
You can shape about a gallon of liquid into
any simple item (no moving parts) that you
can easily hold in one hand. The item is
level 2, but has the appropriate density (so a
liquid sword can be used as a weapon) and
lasts for one hour. Action.


SPEAKS TO THE
DATASPHERE
The voice has always been there,
whispering, whispering. At first, you
couldn’t make it out. But through practice
and devotion, you have learned to decipher
messages coming out of thin air. And what’s
more, you learned to talk back. Now the
voice sometimes does things for you. The
datasphere is your friend.
Most people can’t tell you have this ability
just by looking at you, although you have
a special device that you carry or that is
implanted somewhere on your body that helps
you decipher and speak with the datasphere.
Nanos and Seekers are most likely to
choose this focus.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. Something about
them disrupts your connection to the
datasphere. When they are next to you, all
tasks related to tapping into the datasphere
are one step more difficult for you.
2. Pick one other PC. You’ve discovered
that this character is somewhat tuned to
the datasphere, too. While you’re within
short range of them, you can hear their
“thoughts” through the channel of the
datasphere. You can’t seem to turn this off.
Whether you tell them or not is up to you.
3. Pick one other PC. When they found out
that you could connect to the datasphere,
they seemed frightened. You’re not sure if
they were frightened by your ability, or by
what you might learn about them. It’s up to
them if they ever want to tell you.
4. Pick one other PC. You’ve discovered
that this character is somewhat tuned to the
datasphere, too. While you’re within short
range of them, the two of you can speak
“mentally” by using the datasphere as a
channel.
Additional Equipment: You have a
numenera device (worn or implanted on your
skin) that adds 1 point to your Intellect Pool.
If you’re ever without the artifact, subtract 5
points from your Intellect Pool; the points are
restored if you regain the item.
Scan Training: If you have the Scan
esotery from your type, you’re automatically
trained in it. Enabler.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You learn an
additional piece of information about the
object, person, or topic in question.
Major Effect Suggestions: You can take
another action on that same turn.
Tier 1: Knowledge Tap (1 Intellect point).
Except in places where your access is cut off
from the datasphere, you can tap in briefly
and learn a bit more about something you
can see. You get an asset on a task involving
that person or object. Action.
Machine Interface (2 Intellect points). The
difficulty of discerning the level, function,
and activation of numenera devices that
you touch is decreased by one step for one
minute. Enabler


STARES DOWN ADVERSITY
Creatures from the prior worlds, mutants,
bandits, ultraterrestrials, and more are real
and present dangers for those who explore
the Ninth World. Fear makes most stay
put, which leads to isolation. But you’re not
afraid. You know that you’re a match for
any menace. When something threatens
you, you threaten it right back. Nothing can
avoid your gaze, but some things certainly
would like to.
Glaives often choose this focus.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You once saved this
character from a dangerous situation.
2. Pick one other PC. This character once
ran full bore into you while running away
from . . . something. You stopped them just
by being in the wrong place at the wrong
time, but they seem to hold it against you.
3. Pick one other PC. You feel indebted
to this character and go out of your way to
protect them from harm.
4. Pick two other PCs. You tried but failed
to save their loved one from an NPC or
creature you threatened to kill if it didn’t
stand down. It also got away from you, and
is still out there.
Additional Equipment: You have a weapon
of your choice.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your foe is
frightened by your watchful intensity and
backs away, unwilling to attack. It can still
defend itself.
Major Effect Suggestions: You regain 2
points to your Might Pool.
Tier 1: Watchful Intensity. You are trained
in all tasks related to perception and
intimidation. Enabler.
Rally on Me (2+ Intellect points). Being
brave in the face of adversity requires an
assurance that one’s defenses are sound.
You or a creature within short range gains
an asset to one defense roll within the next
round. For each additional Intellect point
you spend, you can simultaneously provide
an asset to one additional creature. Enabler.


STEPS INTO THE OUTSIDE
Exploration is in your blood, but the places
you want to go do not exist in reality. In this
reality. You know there are far more than
three dimensions. With practice and help
(through drugs, a special device, an inborn
talent, or a combination of all of these), you
can perceive these other dimensions, and
even change your phase to touch them. If
you train enough, you’ll actually be able to
travel to them.
As an explorer, you carry a pack filled
with all manner of supplies, just in case
you become stranded in another dimension
longer than you wish.
Seekers are most drawn to this type.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You are fairly certain
that this character doesn’t believe that your
abilities are real.
2. Pick one other PC. You believe this
character hails from an alternate dimension.
Whether you ask them about it is up to you.
3. Pick one other PC. Whenever this
character is near, your abilities seem to
take longer to activate and become more
difficult.
4. Pick one other PC. If they are near you,
they gain the benefit of any ability you use
on yourself if you choose to spend 1 more
Intellect point.
Additional Equipment: Explorer’s pack.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You restore 2
points to your Intellect Pool.
Major Effect Suggestions: You gain an
Insight after a brief glimpse of several
potential parallel worlds branching off from
where you stand now. (You do not have to
spend 3 Intellect points for this Insight.)
Tier 1: Walk Through Walls (2 Intellect
points). The journey to the outside begins
slowly. You can pass through physical
barriers at a rate of 1 inch (3 cm) per round
(minimum of one round to pass through
any barrier). You can’t act (other than
moving) or perceive anything until you pass
entirely through the barrier. You can’t pass
through energy barriers. Action.
Dimensional Lore: You are trained in
tasks related to knowledge about alternate
dimensions. Enabler.


VENTURES INTO THE NIGHT
A portion of your body has been previously
replaced with artificial tech that adapts you
to surviving and eventually even thriving
out in the void of the space between
worlds. Alternatively, you belong to a secret
race of creatures already fitted with partly
subdermal, partly external synth-and-metal
machinery that provides adaptation simply
as part of your cultural heritage.
Whatever their appearance, your
components grant you special abilities to
survive in vacuum without air or a suit, the
ability to plug into vehicles in order to act
as a pilot, and as you advance, eventually
the ability to fly through the night yourself
without need of a starcraft.
You probably wear a cloak with a hood
or something similar to hide your artificial
parts from those who would persecute you.
Nanos and Seekers are most likely to
choose this focus.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. This character knows
your true nature, even if no one else does.
You suspect the character might be from
another world.
2. Pick one other PC. This character has
informed you that they can hear “otherworldly
melodies” whenever they stand next to you.
You have no idea what the source of such
sounds might be—you can’t hear them. It’s
up to the character whether they find the
music soothing, unnerving, or annoying.
3. Pick one other PC. You’re pretty sure
that they are just here to mine you for parts.
They choose whether or not this is true.
4. Pick one other PC. That character
confided in you that they suspect you are an
agent of an enemy race of creatures from
another world. You deny it.
Additional Equipment: With your GM’s
approval, access to a small starcraft.
Minor Effect Suggestions: The difficulty of
the next task attempted by an ally is reduced
by one step.
Major Effect Suggestions: You can take an
immediate extra action.
Tier 1: Air Supply. Your body is modified
so that you do not need an external air
supply, nor are you hindered by poisonous
gas or other environmental conditions that
threaten breathing creatures. In addition,
you can withstand the rigors of vacuum.
Your modifications sustain you for up to
three days before you need to spend at
least ten minutes in an area where you can
breathe normally to recharge. Enabler.
Night Lore. You are trained in general
knowledge related to other nearby planets
and worlds. Enabler.


WIELDS A WHIP
You need only one weapon: a whip. A whip
is so much more than the sum of its parts,
at least in your hand. A handle connected
to a 20-foot (6 m) long lash composed of
braided fiber to create a flexible strand is
used by some simply to punish. While you
can accomplish the same, you’ve improved
your skill so much that you can cause a
significant amount of damage every time
you crack the air with it. You might have
gained your skills through intense
training, constant practice
because of your previous
profession as animal
handler, or something
else.
Without your whip,
you feel naked. That’s
why you usually carry a
secondary whip disguised
as several loops of cord serving
as a belt for your loose, comfortable
clothing.
Glaives are most likely to choose this
focus.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You once overheard
them say that whips are a silly weapon. You
hope to prove them wrong.
2. Pick one other PC. That character’s
mother gave you the whip you now wield.
3. Pick one other PC. That character was a
slave, and you the slave overseer, until you
freed that character and turned your back
on your old profession. Other slavers may
still be looking for you both.
4. Pick one other PC. This person doesn’t
seem to understand the room you need to
wield your whip effectively, and seems to
have a habit of getting in your way. If you
miss your foe and accidentally hit someone
else in immediate range, it’s likely to be
them.
Minor Effect Suggestions: You trip your
target and knock them prone.
Major Effect Suggestions: Your whip tip
flicks the target in the eye, blinding it for
one minute.
Tier 1: Savage Whip. You inflict 2 additional
points of damage with a light whip. In
addition, you can target a specific body part
of a foe without the usual penalty for trading
damage for effect. Enabler.


WONDERS
Existence is a wondrous gift. Consciousness
gives one the capacity to appreciate
that existence, stand in rapt awe at the
magnificence of life and reality, and better
yet, ask questions that almost always reveal
even deeper, more unexpected truths. When
you wonder about something, you do so in
both senses of the term: you ask and you
marvel simultaneously.
Your sincere appreciation for everything
around you makes some people love you
for your genuine earnestness. Though a few
find your outlook annoying, you don’t mind.
You merely wonder what it is about them
that makes them deny the magnificence of
gathering knowledge and appreciating all
life has to offer.
Glints and Seekers are most likely to
choose this focus.

connection:
1. Pick one other PC. You were childhood
friends. As you became more enamored
of life, the other character descended into
more of an angry acceptance of it all. You
worry that they don’t see the world as you
do.
2. Pick one other PC. You can see that
the character needs some advice on how to
appreciate life to its fullest. You’re not sure
that they are ready to hear it yet.
3. Pick one other PC. They seem to revel
in new experiences and learning new things
as much as you. When one of you helps the
other in a noncombat trained task, an asset
is gained even if neither of you is trained in
accomplishing that task.
4. Pick one other PC. The character was
once your mentor, but you felt you’d learned
everything you could, and moved on. You
are still friends.
Additional Equipment: An additional
oddity.
Minor Effect Suggestions: Your foe is
distracted by your question and leaves
themselves open; the difficulty of the next
attack made against them is reduced by one
step.
Major Effect Suggestions: Intuition flares,
and you can ask the GM one question about
what you’re looking at.
Tier 1: Asks the Question (1 Intellect point).
You can pose a question to a creature that
can see and understand you that is so
insightful, the question distracts it so that it
loses its next turn. If you choose to continue
asking questions to the same target to keep
it pondering for longer than one round, you
must use Effort each time. Action.
Learning: Always asking questions
eventually provides answers. You are trained
in one noncombat skill. Enabler.
